

IVERSITY
OF
OF M
L·LID
THE
MICHIGAN
RIES.N

•

•

ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS
OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL
SYSTEMS

PRENTICE-HALL INTERNATIONAL SERIES
IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
William L. Everitt, editor
PRENTICE-HALL, INC.
PRENTICE-HALL INTERNATIONAL, INC., UNITED KINGDOM AND EIRE
PRENTICE-HALL OF CANADA, LTD., CANADA
Blackwell & Kotzebue, Semiconductor-Diode Parametric Amplifiers
Boisvert, Robichaud & Robert, Signal Flow Graphs and Applications
Chang, Energy Conversion
Kuo, Analysis and Synthesis of Sampled-Data Control Systems
Maley & Earle, The Logic Design of Transistor Digital Computers
Nussbaum, Semiconductor Device Physics
SERIES IN INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROLS
William W. Seifert, editor
PRENTICE-HALL INTERNATIONAL, INC., London
PRENTICE-HALL OF AUSTRALIA, LTD., Sydney
PRENTICE-HALL OF CANADA, LTD., Toronto
PRENTICE-HALL FRANCE, S.A.R.L., Paris
PRENTICE-HALL OF JAPAN, INC., Tokyo
PRENTICE-HALL DE MEXICO, S.A., Mexico City


R
G₁
System
block diagram
H
H
H
G
၆၇
G3
G
G₁
G2
H
-H
System
signal flow graph
Modified composite
signal flow graph
-H
-Ox2
Output transforms
C(s) =
R*(s)G(s)
1+G*(s)H*(s)
C*(s)
=
C(z, m)
=
G*(s)R*(s)
1+G*(s)H*(s)
G(z, m)R(z)
1+G(z)H(z)
-GGG3H)*
PIG₁RY
C(s) =
G2*(s)G3 (s)G₁R*(s)
1+G2*(G1G3H)*
GG3
-G (G3H)*
C*(s) =
G₂Gym
G2 (s)G3 (s)G₁R**(s)
1+G2*(s)G1GзH**(s)
-H
G2G3
H-
C(z, m)
====
G2(z)G3 (z, m)G, R(z)
1+G2(z)G1G3H(z)
ох
-H
Gm
DO
0
Q(G₁R)
09
-H
G
(HG
G*(s)G(s)H(s)R*(s)
1+GH*(s)
C(s)
=
GR*(s)
C*(s) =
G*(s)R*(s)
1+HG*(s)
-(HG)
G(z)GH(z, m)R(z)
C(z, m) = R(z)G(z, m)
-
୪
1+HG(z)
G₂(s)G₁R*(s)
C(s) =
1+G2*(s)G₂H*(s)
-(G₂H)
X2
G
C*(s) =
G2*(s)GIR(s)
1+G₂*(s)G₂H*(s)
၆၇
G2m
C(z, m)
G(z, m)G R(z)
1+ Ga(z) GsH(z)

193.-
ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS
OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL
SYSTEMS
BENJAMIN C. KUO
Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering
University of Illinois
PRENTICE-HALL, INC.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.

Engin. Library
TJ
216
·K956
сер
1963 by PRENTICE-HALL, INC., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be repro-
duced in any form, by mimeograph or any other means,
without permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 63-10665
Printed in the United States of America
C

to Margaret


PREFACE
This book has been written as a text for a course in digital and
sampled-data control systems. However, since it was prepared
with the needs of modern scientists and engineers in mind, it should
also prove useful as a reference book for scientists and engineers
working in control systems and related fields. The author has put
much effort into preparing a book that may be studied with a
minimum amount of guidance.
The bulk of the material presented here has been taught by the
author since 1958 in a graduate course at the University of Illinois.
However, with the recent advances in the theory and practice of
sampled-data systems, more than one semester is now needed to
cover the entire up-to-date subject. If the book is used as a text in
a one-semester course, some of the chapters will have to be skipped
for lack of time.
The author assumes that the reader has a knowledge of the basic
theory of feedback control systems, although he need not have had
prior contact with the theories of sampled- or digital-data systems.
The reader should also have adequate training in ordinary dif-
ferential equations, the Laplace transformation and its applica-
tions, and the complex variables theory. In order to comprehend
the material in Chapter 11, he would need some background on the
theories of proability and statistics.
Both the z-transform and the state transition techniques are
emphasized in this book. The z-transform method is straightforward
vii

in its application to sampled-data systems. Through the use of the
z-transform method, many of the well-known analysis and design
techniques of continuous-data systems can be modified and applied
to sampled-data systems. The state transition approach permits a
unified study of a great variety of sampled-data systems. It utilizes
the signal flow graphs and the state transition flow graphs to give a
unification between computer and analytical solutions.
The book deals with the following topics: linear analysis, linear
design and synthesis, statistical approach, and nonlinear systems.
Chapter 1 serves as an introduction; the historical background of
sampled-data systems and the importance and advantages of sam-
pling in control systems are the highlights of this chapter. Chapter
2 gives the physical interpretation and a comprehensive mathe-
matical description of the sampling process. Chapter 3 describes
how a signal may be recovered from its sampled version and in-
cludes problems related to the process. Chapter 4 introduces the
theory and basic applications of the z-transformation and presents
the theorems and the limitations of the z-transforms. The analysis
of sampled-data systems begins in Chapter 5. This chapter covers
such topics as the block diagrams, signal flow graphs, matrix rep-
resentation, and the state transition method. Chapters 6 and 7
discuss time and frequency responses of sampled-data systems.
Stability studies are carried out using analytical and graphical
methods. Chapters 8 and 9 are devoted to the principles and tech-
niques of systems design. Chapter 10 deals with multirate, skip,
nonuniform, and nonsynchronized samplings. Chapter 11 presents
statstical analysis and design. The final chapter is on nonlinear
systems; these are studied through use of the state transition,
phase-plane, incremental phase-plane, and describing function
methods.
Although most of the material in this text has been derived from
the literature of sampled-data systems, some original ideas have
been included. In a book of this nature reference cannot be made to
all of the original work and contributors in the vast and active field
of sampled-data systems. The author wishes to apologize to those
contributors in the field whose works and names are not mentioned
through either oversight or ignorance.
The author wishes to acknowledge with gratitude the encourage-
ment and help he received from his colleagues at the Electrical
Engineering Department of the University of Illinois. The author
is also indebted to his graduate students, whose questions and class-
room discussions have assisted in many ways in the preparation
of the manuscript. The encouragement and interest of Dean W. L.
Everitt, editor of this series, and Dr. E. C. Jordan, Head of the
viii

Electrical Engineering Department of the University of Illinois,
have been invaluable in the preparation of the manuscript. Finally,
the author's special thanks go to his wife Margaret, whose patience
and understanding made the tedious writing of this book an enjoy-
able undertaking.
B.C.K.
ix


TABLE OF CONTENTS
1
INTRODUCTION
1
1.1 What Are Sampled-Data and Digital Control Systems? 1
1.2 Importance of Sampling in Control Systems 6
1.3 A Survey of the Methods of Analysis and Synthesis
of Sampled-Data Systems 10
2 THE SAMPLING PROCESS
2.1 Introduction 18
2.2 Mathematical Analysis of the Sampling Process 20
2.3 Mathematical Description of the Ideal Sampling Process-
The Ideal Sampler 29
2.4 Summary 37
3 RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS
3.1 Introduction 39
3.2 Data Reconstruction by Polynomial Extrapolation 41
3.3 The Zero-Order Hold
42
3.4 The First-Order Hold 46
3.5 The Fractional-Order Hold 49
3.6 The Exponential Hold 51
18
39
xi

4
54
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
549
4.1 Definition of the Z-Transform
54
4.2 Evaluation of Z-Transforms 56
4.3 Mapping of the S-Plane into the Z-Plane 59
4.4 The Inverse Z-Transformation
4.5 Theorems of the Z-Transform
63
68
4.6 The Pulse Transfer Function 73
4.7 Limitations of the Z-Transform Method 79
4.8 Response of Open-Loop Sampled-Data Systems between
Sampling Instants 82
4.9 Theorem of the Modified Z-Transforms 99
5 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
OF SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
5.1 Block Diagram Analysis and Transfer Functions of
Closed-Loop Sampled-Data Systems 104
5.2 Signal Flow Graphs of Sampled-Data Systems 112
5.3 Modified Z-Transform of Outputs of Closed-Loop
Sampled-Data Systems 121
5.4 Transmission Matrix of Sampled-Data Systems 125
5.5 The State-Variable Approach 130
6 TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
6.1 Introduction
143
104
143
6.2 Comparison of Transient Responses of Continuous-Data
and Sampled-Data Systems 145
6.3 Stability of Sampled-Data Systems
149
6.4 The Schur-Cohn Stability Criterion 153
6.5 Jury's Stability Test 156
6.6 Extension of Routh-Hurwitz Criterion to Sampled-Data
Systems 157
6.7 Effect of Pole-Zero Configuration of C* (s) in the S-Plane
and C(z) in the Z-Plane upon System Transient Behavior 164
6.8 Effect of the Pole-Zero Configurations in the Z-Plane
upon the Maximum Overshoot and Peak Time of Transient
Response of Sampled-Data Systems
170
6.9 Root Locus Method for Sampled-Data Systems 178
6.10 Transient Response and Relative Stability from Root
Locus Plots
189
6.11 System Response between Sampling Instants 194
6.12 Steady-State Response-Steady-State Error Analysis 206
xii

7 FREQUENCY RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
215
7.1 Introduction 215
7.2 The Nyquist Plot 216
7.3 The Bode Diagram 229
7.4 The Gain-Phase Plot
232
7.5 Modified Z-Transform Analysis 235
8 DESIGN AND COMPENSATION OF SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS BY CONTINUOUS
NETWORKS
8.1 Introduction 245
8.2 Cascade Compensation by Continuous-Data Networks 249
8.3 Cascade Compensation by Bilinear Transformation Method
8.4 Feedback Compensation with Continuous-Data Networks 265
253
9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
9.1 Introduction 272
9.2 The Digital Controller 274
9.3 Digital Compensation Design through Bilinear
Transformation 289
9.4 Design in the Z-Plane Using the Root Locus 295
9.5 Synthesis in the Z-Plane
309
9.6 Design of Sampled-Data Systems with “Minimal” or
"Deadbeat" Responses 325
9.7 Design Using the Staleness Weighting Factor 340
9.8 Combination of the Z-Plane Synthesis and the
Minimal Response Design 343
9.9 Synthesis by the State Variable and State Transition
Approach 347
10 MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
10.1 Multirate Sampling 353
10.2 Variable-Rate Sampling 370
10.3 State Variables and Transition Equations of
11
Multirate and Skip-Sampled Systems 382
245
272
352
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 391
11.1 Introduction 391
397
11.2 Statistical Characteristics of Continuous Random Signals 393
11.3 Statistical Characteristics of Sampled Random Signals
11.4 Sampled Random Signals in Sampled-Data Systems 404
11.5 Mean-Square Error 410
11.6 Optimum Synthesis Using Mean-Square Error Criterion 417
xiii

12
430
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
12.1 Introduction 430
12.2 Analysis of Nonlinear Sampled-Data Systems by
State Transition Technique 432
12.3 The Phase-Plane Method 437
12.4 The Incremental Phase-Plane Method 458
12.5 The Describing Function Method 471
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES
PROBLEMS
APPENDIX
INDEX
495
498
519
523
xiv

1
INTRODUCTION
1.1 WHAT ARE SAMPLED-DATA AND DIGITAL
CONTROL SYSTEMS?
Within the past few years much progress has been made in the
development of sampled-data and digital control systems. These systems
differ from the conventional continuous-data systems in that the
signal in one or more sections of the system is in the form of either
a pulse train or a numerical code such as the binary code. Usually,
sampled-data systems refer to a more general class of systems whose
signals are in the form of pulsed data, whereas the term digital
control systems implies the use of a digital computer or digital
Continuous
signal
e(t)
Sampler
Pulsed
data Smoothing
ep(1)
filter
Linear
system
c(t)
(a)
ex (1)
(b)
T 2T 3T
(c)
Fig. 1-1 (a) Open-loop sampled-data system. (b) Continuous in-
put to sampler. (c) Pulse signal output of sampler.
Π
1

2 INTRODUCTION
Chap. 1
sensing element in a system. In general, a sampled-data system is
defined as one that receives information or data only at discrete
instants of time. The signals in a sampled-data system may be of
the form of a periodic or an aperiodic pulse train, with no infor-
mation transmitted between two consecutive pulses. Figure 1-1a
illustrates in a simple manner how an open-loop sampled-data system
operates. A continuous input signal e(t) is sampled by a sampling
device, and the output of the sampler is a sequence of pulses. If the
continuous input e(t) is represented as shown in Fig. 1-1b, the
output of the sampler, e(t) is shown in Fig. 1-1c. In this case, the
sampler is assumed to have a uniform sampling rate. On the basis
of the signal configurations of Fig. 1-1, the sampling may be regarded
as a pulse-amplitude modulator. The sampling schemes exist in many
variations; some of these are the periodic, cyclic-rate, multirate, skip,
random, and pulse-width modulated samplings. The most common
variations are single-rate and multirate samplings.
A digital control system is defined as a control system in which
the signal at one or more points of the system is expressed in a
numerical code for digital computers or digital transducers in the
system. The appearance of digital signals (such as binary numbers)
in part of the system requires the use of digital-to-analog as well as
analog-to-digital converters. The block diagram of a typical digital
control system using a digital computer is shown in Fig. 1-2. A
sample-data system can also include a digital computer or a digital
Digital
code Digital
input
computer
Digital-to-
analog
converter
Continuous
output
Plant
Analog-to-
digital
converter
Fig. 1-2 A typical digital control system.
Input
Sampler
Encoder
Digital
computer
Output
Decoder
Plant
Fig. 1-3 A sampled-data system with digital computer.
data-processing unit if the pulsed signal in the system is first put
into digital code for the computer and the output of the computer
is decoded into pulsed-data. An example of such a system is shown
in Fig. 1-3.
Although the use of sampled-data or pulsed-data in control systems

Sec. 1.1
INTRODUCTION 3
was recognized quite early in the history of feedback control systems,
only recently has significant progress and emphasis been made in the
development of the analysis and design techniques of sampled-data
systems. The complexities that have arisen in the area of automatic
tracking systems and the increased use of digital computers in
control systems have caused considerable activity in the field of
sampled-data and digital control systems.
The exact origin of the engineering adoption of the sampling
concept is difficult to trace. However, a basic form of the sampled-
data system was described by Gouyt some sixty years ago. Gouy
+V
Normally closed
relay contacts
Motor
driven (
wheel
Relay
coil
Contact rod
Mercury
thermometer
Heating
ww
coil
Oven
Fig. 1-4 A constant temperature oven utilizing sampled-data.
devised a temperature regulation system consisting of the elements
arranged as shown in Fig. 1-4. The aim of the system is to maintain
a constant temperature in the oven at all times. Whenever the
electrical contact rod is immersed in the mercury, current flows in
the relay coil causing the relay to open and thus interrupt the
heating current. Since the contact is periodically dipped into the
mercury, the heating current consists of a sequence of pulses. Further-
more, since the time that the contact is immersed in the mercury
Temperature
of oven
h(t)
Heating
current of
Oven
h (1)
Pulse width is
proportional to
amplitude of
h(t) at t = nT
KT (k+1) T (k+2)T (k+3)T (k+4)T
Fig. 1-5 Input and output of pulse-width sampler.
† G. Gouy, “On a Constant Temperature Oven," J. Physique, vol. 6, ser. 3, (1897),
pp. 479-483.

4 INTRODUCTION
"
Chap. 1
depends upon the level of the mercury and the level in turn depends
upon the temperature of the oven, the pulse widths of the heating
current are varied in proportion to the temperature of the oven, but
the pulses all have equal amplitudes. A typical set of signals of the
pulsed-data temperature control system is shown in Fig. 1-5. In
contrast to the sampling scheme described in Fig. 1-1, which is
called the pulse-amplitude sampling, the pulse-data of Fig. 1-5 are
termed the pulse-duration or pulse width sampled-data. A pulse-
amplitude sampler is essentially a linear device in the sense that
inputs and outputs of the sampler are governed by the principle of
superposition. However, a pulse-duration sampler is considered to be
a nonlinear device since the superposition principle no longer holds
between the input and the output signals. Although in this example,
the merit of using pulsed-data control in regulating temperature is
T₁
Control
pulse train
T₂
S
B+
RL
A
R
B
I2
www
111
ww
카
​H
Light
source
(a)
R
Sampler
Hold
+
Amplifier
and plant
B
H
(b)
Fig. 1-6 (a) Light control system with sampled-data. (b) Block
diagram of the light control system.

Sec. 1.1
INTRODUCTION 5
not apparent, at least the system represents a classical application
of the scheme of sampling in a simple control system.
Another classical example of a physical system employing sampled-
data was described by Guanella, who suggested the use of sampling
in electronic feedback amplifiers, electro-acoustical converters, and
radio and other transmitters or receivers for the purpose of eliminating
instability conditions or improving stability conditions. Fig. 1-6a
shows a light control system with sampled-data which was devised
by Guanella. The block diagram of the system is shown in Fig. 1-6b.
The brightness of the light source is assumed to depend upon the
current or voltage supplied by the amplifier A. In addition to the
reflected light, a small part of the light emerges from the source and
is directed upon a photocell. A feedback signal B, proportional to the
output of the photocell is subtracted from the reference signal R
through the transformer T₁. The block S is made up of the elements of
the sampling device that is to sample the signal RB at periodic
intervals. The circuit in S is essentially a double-triode series gate.‡
The triodes conduct and cut-off simultaneously and periodically in
accordance with the control pulse train applied to the grids of the
triodes. Therefore, the impedance between the points 1 and 2 in Fig.
1-6a varies between a small and an almost infinitely large value accord-
ing to the control pulse train. The voltage on the controlling grid of the
pentode is zero whenever the triodes are cut-off and is equal to R-B
during the pulse duration p of the control pulse. Therefore, the block
S functions as a pulse-amplitude modulator or sampler, and its input-
output relations may be described by the waveforms of Fig. 1-1.
The pentode and the condenser C act as an integrating or hold
device. When a voltage pulse of amplitude RB and pulser width.
p is applied to the grid at point 2, a current pulse proportional to
RB with equal duration is passed through the condenser C and
causes a corresponding change in the voltage of C by an amount
proportional to RB. Thus the voltage at the input to the amplifier
A is changed by the amount R(nT) B(nT) at the n-th sampling
instant t = nT. If the pulse signal at point 2 is represented by
en = K[R(nT) - B(nT)] at
B(nT)] at t = nT
Σ
k = 0
then the input to A is written as en. Note that the hold device
used here is not commonly used in the modern sampled-data control
↑ G. Guanella, "Electrical Oscillation Translating Systems," U.S. Patent, 2,253,976,
August 26, 1941, (Private correspondence from Guanella).
J. Millman and H. Taub. Pulse and Digital Circuits, (New York: McGraw-Hill
Book Company, 1956), p. 456.

6 INTRODUCTION
Chap. 1
systems. Normally, the function of a hold device is to reconstruct
from the pulsed-data the original continuous signal. The pentode
integrator described in the system does not fulfill this purpose.
However, the present sample-and-hold scheme can be shown to
improve the stability condition of the feedback system, whereas the
conventional hold device, such as a zero-order hold (one that holds
the amplitude of a pulse until the next occurs), used in common
sampled-data systems is known to have adverse effects on system
stability.
1.2 IMPORTANCE OF SAMPLING IN CONTROL SYSTEMS
The examples given in the preceding section on sampled-data
systems merely illustrate the early application of sampling in feed-
back systems. However, in order to fully understand the merits and
the reasons for using sampling in control systems, we should ask
the natural question: Why sampled-data? In other words, what are
the advantages and characteristics of sampling that have made
sampled-data and digital control systems so important in modern
control technology? To answer this question, a survey of the
available class of sampled-data and digital control systems will be
helpful. In general, the applications of sampled-data systems can
be divided into two main categories: systems with inherent sampling
and systems with intentional sampling. These systems are discussed
as follows:
1. Control Systems With Inherent Sampling
In this class of systems, the signals are available only in sampled
form. Examples of these systems are:
1. Radar Tracking System. The signals sent out and received by
a radar tracking system are in the form of pulse trains. The scanning
operation of the radar performs the function of a sampler converting
both the azimuth and the elevation information to sampled-data.
2. Time Sharing Systems. Because of economic factors in the cost
of information transmission, a data transmission link is often shared
among several control systems. For instance, in the multichannel
drift stabilization system shown in Fig. 1-7, one stabilizing amplifier
is used to stabilize a group of d-c amplifiers. With the aid of a
sampler, which samples the error voltage of each amplifier in turn,
† P.G. Pantazelos, "Sampled-Data Analysis of a Drift-Stabilization System," A.I.E.E.
Conference Paper No. CP 56-961, October 1956.

Sec. 1.2
7
INTRODUCTION
Input
From other
amplifiers
Zin
Zfb
d-c amplifier
d-c feedback amplifier
Output
Smoothing
filter
Commutator
Stabilization
amplifier
To other
amplifiers
R
ww
Fig. 1-7 Multichannel drift stabilization system.
the stabilization amplifier is time-shared among several d-c amplifiers.
Thus the cost, size, and maintenance of equipment is reduced.
3. Digital Computer in Control Systems. Digital computers have
become very important as elements in control systems. There are
several important reasons for this use of digital computers. First of
all, digital computers are light in weight when compared to analog
computers of the same capacity; and conversely, for a given weight,
the capacity of digital computers is far greater than that of analog
Digital

sensor
Digital
Tape or
card reader
Buffer
storage
voltage
Clamp
converter
Digital position feedback
Power
amplifier
Compensation
loop
Tach
Motor
Digital
sensor
Drill table
Fig. 1-8 Digitally-controlled drill-table positioning system.
Gear train

8 INTRODUCTION
Chap. 1
computers. In some cases digital computers used as compensators
for control systems are preferable to the continuous type in the
improvement of static and dynamic system characteristics. As an
example, a digital control system used for the control of drill table
position so that a number of specified holes can be drilled in a
work piece is shown in Fig. 1-8. Digital computers are also used
often in modern hot plate mills, with preset programming systems
using devices such as plugboards or punch cards to store the
sequential roll-screw-down settings required to roll an ingot to a
finished plate or slab. Such digital systems simplify the mill operator's
job considerably.
One also frequently finds many other applications of digital com-
puters in control systems: fields such as guidance control for missile
navigation, air-surveillance and weapon control systems, and many
others.
2. Control Systems with Intentional Sampling
There is a class of system in which the sampling operation is
purposely introduced. This is one of the recent trends in the design
of feedback control systems. Some of the reasons for this inten-
tional sampling are given below:
1. Sampling Improves Sensitivity. In servo applications a load must
sometimes be driven by a relatively low-power-level signal. By the
use of sampling in control systems, tremendous amounts of power
can be controlled by sensitive control elements without excessive
power amplification. Also, the loading effect upon sensitive instru-
ments may be minimized by the sampling operation. A classical
example of this improvement in sensitivity through sampling is the
chopper galvanometer described by Oldenbourg and Sartorius, the
system is shown in Fig. 1-9. In this device a small signal is applied
to the galvanometer coil. The chopper bar is lowered periodically and
the projected needle of the galvonometer causes the load to rotate
in proportion to the signal strength. The torque which is applied
to the load shaft is thus determined by the chopper-bar drive rather
than just by torque developed in the galvanometer coil.
† D. J. Gimpel, “Sampled-Data Systems," Control Engineering, February 1957, pp.
99-106.
C. Burdick, "Digital Computer Runs Hot Plate Mill," Control Engineering, January
1960, pp. 126-130.
$R. C. Oldenbourg and R. Sartorius, The Dynamics of Automatic Controls, Chap.
5, publication of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York.

Sec. 1.2
9
INTRODUCTION
Chopper-bar
-Galvanometer
Το
load
Motor driven
cam
Fig. 1-9 Chopper-bar galvanometer.
2. Digital Transducers. A transducer in its broadest sense is any
device which can couple unlike systems, transferring energy from
one to the other and converting units. It is generally more useful
for the control engineers to consider that a transducer is a device
that transmits information, regardless of energy level and dimensions.
A digital transducer is any coupling device that transmits data along
in some form of discrete code to other unlike systems or subsystems.
The most important reason for using a digital transducer is the
relative immunity of digital signals to distortion by noise and non-
linearities. Furthermore, digital transducers and sensing devices,
particularly rotary and linear-position sensors, are available with
accuracy and resolution difficult to achieve by analog techniques.
3. Digital Coded Signals. Sampled-data in the form of digital
coded signals can be stored for any length of time, transmitted over
any distance, retransmitted, and detected or used as many times
as necessary with no loss in accuracy. These properties permit
elaborate command signal programs to be formulated and executed
with extremely high accuracy.
4. Behavior. In control systems design, under certain conditions a
sampled-data system with variable sampling intervals or with variable
pulse widths behaves better than a continuous-data system. This is
particularly true in the compensation of systems having plants with
transportation lags.
+ E. J. Kompass, "What About Digital Transducers?" Control Engineering, July
1958, pp. 94-99.

10 INTRODUCTION
Chap. 1
1.3 A SURVEY OF THE METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND
SYNTHESIS OF SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
Very little work was done on the analysis and design of sampled-
data systems prior to 1950. Although early textbooks on servo-
mechnisms written by MacColl (1945), James, Nichols and Phillips
(1947), and Oldenbourg and Sartorius$ (1948) all cover some of the
topics of sampled-data systems, the treatments have mostly been
limited to stability analysis and the derivation of transfer functions
of pulsed systems.
Since the early 1950's when digital computers were first used in
control systems and when the need arose for complex automatic
tracking systems, sampled-data and digital control systems have
enjoyed a most fruitful period of development and resesarch. Not
only have numerous papers been published in the United States and
abroad, but several books devoted solely to the subject of sampled-
data and digital control systems have also become available.
In this section some of the available methods in treating sampled-
data and digital control systems will be indicated, and the major
topics of current interest that need further investigation will be
pointed out along with new problems to be tackled. In general, the
studies of sampled-data and digital control systems can be put into.
the following categories: Linear theory, nonlinear theory, statistical
theory, time varying theory, and digital control theory.
1. Linear Theory
In linear sampled-data theory, the system is assumed to consist
of linear components only. A pulse-amplitude-modulated sampler is
considered a linear device, since its input-output relations satisfy the
superposition principle. A majority of the literature on linear theory
† L. A. MacColl, Fundamental Theory of Servomechanisms, Chap. 10, (Princeton,
New Jersey: D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc. 1945).
H. M. James, N. B. Nichols, and R. S. Phillips, Theory of Servomechanisms, Chap.
5, (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1947).
§ R. C. Oldenbourg and H. Sartorius, The Dynamics of Automatic Controls.
|| J. R. Ragazzini and G. F. Franklin, Sampled-Data Control Systems, (New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1958). E. I. Jury, Sampled-Data Control Systems, (New
York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1958). Y. Tsypkin, Theory of Pulse Systems, (Moscow:
State Press for Physics and Mathematical Literature, 1959). J. T. Tou, Digital and
Sampled-Data Control Systems, (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1959).
E. I. Jury, "Recent Advances in the Field of Sampled-Data and Digital Control
Systems," Proc. of the 1960 Conference of the International Federation of Automatic
Control, Moscow.

Sec. 1.3
INTRODUCTION 11
assumes that the output of a sampler is a train of impulses with
the strength (area) of the impulse equal to the height of the pulse
at the sampling instant. This major assumption is necessary in order
to simplify the mathematics involved in the analysis and design of
sampled-data systems. However, the assumption is justified only if
the actual pulse width of the sampler is small when compared with
the dominant time constant of the system and if the sampler is
followed by a hold device. In the event that the pulse width is wide,
the impulse approximation can at best give a rough estimate of the
actual behavior of the system, and often may even produce mislead-
ing results. However, if the sampler is not followed by a hold device
or smoothing filter, the impulse-modulated approximation is not a
correct description and represents an entirely different system. In fact,
if the hold device is absent and if the pulse width is small so that the
amplitude-modulated pulses are replaced by flat-topped pulses, the
impulse approximation of these flat-topped pulses actually represents
a system with loop-gain equal to 1/p of that of the actual system,
where p is the pulse width.
Once the pulse-amplitude modulated sampler is replaced by an
impulse-amplitude modulated sampler (or ideal sampler), the analysis
of the system can be carried out by use of any of the following
methods:
(1) Difference equation method
(2) Impulse response method
(3) Frequency response method
(4) Signal flow graphs
(5) z-transform and modified z-transform methods.
(6) Root locus and root contour methods
(7) State variable method
These methods are discussed in various degrees of detail in the
ensuing chapters. Although each of the above listed methods has its
advantages and disadvantages, the published works indicate that the
z-transform method is the most popular. The use of the z-trans-
formation for sampled-data systems is entirely analogous to the
application of the Laplace transformation to continuous-data systems.
Sampled-data systems are ordinarily described by equations in the
s-domain with complex coefficients such as e. The z-transformation,
given by the relation z = est, makes possible the description of
sampled-data systems by equations in z with constant coefficients,
and the transfer functions become rational functions in the variable
z. Therefore, most of the widely used techniques for solving linear
continuous-data systems, such as the Nyquist criterion, Routh-Hurwitz
criterion, root locus diagram, or Bode diagram can be modified and

12 INTRODUCTION
Chap. 1
r(t)
e(t)
e (t)
Hold
Continuous
network
Plant
c(t)
G(s)
(a)
r(t)
e(t)
D(s)
Hold
Plant
c(t)
G(s)
T
Digital compensator
D(z)
(b)
Fig. 1-10 (a) Sampled-data control system with continuous-data
compensator. (b) Sampled-data control system with digital com-
pensator.
extended to the studies of linear sampled-data systems.
The design and synthesis of linear sampled-data systems can be
divided into two general catagories: continuous-data compensators
and digital compensators. Typical system configurations of continuous-
data compensation and digital compensation are shown in Fig. 1-10.
In general, other configurations such as feedback compensation and
inner-loop compensation are possible. In control system theory usually,
design refers to a procedure which uses the compensator, whether
it be digital or continuous in nature, as the starting point. In other
words, the designer simply has the task of finding a suitable and
physically realizable compensator so that the compensated system
will satisfy the specified performance criterion. In doing so, the
designer usually has to rely to a great extent on his past experience
in choosing the proper compensating network, and usually some
degree of trail and error is involved. Therefore, the philosophy of
design of linear sampled-data control systems follows directly from
the design of linear continuous-data systems, and the conventional
methods such as the Bode diagram, Nyquist plot, or root locus
diagram can be used.
The synthesis of linear continuous-data systems was first intro-
duced by Aaron and Truxal. The philosophy of synthesis is such
† M. R. Aaron, "Synthesis of Feedback Control Systems by Means of Poles and Zero
Location of the Closed-loop Function," Trans. A.I.E.E., 70, Part II, 1951, pp. 1439-1445.
J. G. Truxal, "Servomechanism Synthesis Through Pole-Zero Configuration," MIT
Research Laboratory of Electronics Technical Report, 162, August 25, 1950; and J. G.
Truxal, Automatic Feedback Control System Synthesis, Chap. 5, New York: McGraw-
Hill Book Company, 1955.

Sec. 1.3
INTRODUCTION 13
that the over-all system transfer function C/R is first determined
to satisfy the design criterion and simultaneously satisfy the physical
realizability of the compensator; then the transfer function of the
compensator is determined from C/R. In contrast to the design
procedure, which works from the inside toward the outside, the
synthesis procedure works from the outside toward the inside of the
system. Synthesis procedure similar to that of Truxal's may be
derived for linear sample-data systems.
In general, the following performance criteria are considered for
the design and synthesis of sampled-data control systems with deter-
ministic input:
(1) Frequency domain criteria: bandwidth, peak reasonance M,,
gain and phase margins.
(2) Time domain criteria: For sampled-data systems, deadbeat
responses can be achieved that have no overshoots and have minimum
response times for aperiodic inputs such as step, velocity or para-
bolic. Other conventional criteria are overshoot, peak time, setting
time, steady-state response, and rise time.
(3) Performance indices: Specifications of minimization of error
criteria such as the integral error, mean-squared error, and integral
square error.
2. Statistical Theory
In many applications of sampled-data systems (as well as con-
tinuous-data systems), the actual system inputs or disturbances are
not deterministic but are random in nature. These random signals
or disturbances can often be described only by their statistical prop-
erties in the form of correlation functions or power spectral density
functions. Therefore, statistical analysis and design of sampled-data
control systems are necessarily important.
[n(1)
n(t) noise
r(t)
Input
Closed-loop or
open-loop sampled
data system
c(t)
Actual output
M(s)
+
от
e(t)
Error
Ideal
system model
Ca(t)
Desired output
Mo(s)
Fig. 1-11 Block diagram illustrating the design of optimum linear
sampled-data system.

14
Chap. 1
INTRODUCTION
The statistical design and synthesis of sampled-data control systems
are best illustrated by the block diagram of Fig. 1-11. The main
essence of the design procedure is to obtain an optimum filter (or
system) that will render a minimum error between the actual and
the desired output signals. The design criteria are based mainly
on the minimization of the mean-square error originally suggested
by Wiener. A system designed from the minimization of the mean-
square error has the characteristic of emphasizing the large errors
and passing over many small errors. A large class of control systems
definitely exists for which minimization of the mean-square error
certainly is not the ideal design criterion. However, if the minimi-
zation of the mean-square error is used as the design criterion, the
random signals or disturbances are readily described by the correlation
functions or the power spectral density functions. Most of the
statistical studies of sampled-data systems are based on the assumption
that the random processes are stationary and the systems subjected
to the random signals are linear and time-invariant. However,
intensified efforts on the statistical studies of nonstationary, time-
varying, as well as nonlinear sampled-data systems should also be
emphasized; these subjects definitely are the present and the future
major topics of many investigators in the field.
3. Nonlinear Systems
The studies of nonlinear sampled-data systems can be divided
into two general catagories: (1) Systems with inherent nonlinearities,
and (2) Systems with intentionally introduced nonlinearities. The
first catagory includes the systems with nonlinear behavior purely
due to physical limitations and imperfections of system components,
while in the second catagory, nonlinear elements such as relays
with dead zones and hysteresis are purposely inserted to improve
the performance of the system. A typical relay-type sampled-data
control system is shown in Fig. 1-12. Pulse-width control and
amplitude quantization in sampled-data systems are also regarded as
modified versions of the ordinary relay control. A pulse-width
r(t)
c(t)
-
Hold
Relay
G(s)
Plant
Fig. 1-12 Sampled-data control system with on-off relay.
† N. Wiener, The Extrapolation, Interpolation, and Smoothing of Stationary
Time Series, New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1948.

Sec. 1.3
INTRODUCTION 15
e(t)
e (t)
Quantizer
-q(1)
(a)
-e4
-е3 -e2
6
g(t)
-93
+92
O
བ
e₁
-92
-93
e2
33
e4 e(t)
(b)
Fig. 1-13 (a) Amplitude quantizer. (b) Input-output character-
istic of an amplitude quantizer.
modulated signal can be thought of as the output of a relay by
controlling the duration of the full positive or negative relay cor-
rection. The amplitude quantizing process is a nonlinear approximation
in the sense that only a discrete set of amplitude levels are produced
for any input signal. The block diagram of the amplitude quantizer
and its input-output characteristics are shown in Fig. 1-13. It is
apparent that the quantizer can be regarded as a relay with multiple-
level corrections. In fact, if the amplitude of the input signal is
small, the quantization effect becomes much more emphasized
because of few levels, and the quantizer becomes an on-off relay.
The nonlinear theory of sampled-data systems has not been
developed fully. The main reason for this lies in the fact that
nonlinear difference and differential equations which described non-
linear sampled-data systems are usually very difficult to solve, and
little has been done in the solution of these equations. The studies
of nonlinear sampled-data systems have been influenced mainly by
the use of the nonlinear theory of continuous-data systems. The
following significant methods of analysis and design have been
developed and investigated:

16 INTRODUCTION
Chap. 1
(1) Phase plane method
(2) Incremental phase plane method
(3) Describing function method
(4) Discrete describing function method
(5) Difference equation method
(6) Matrix method
(7) Second method of Lyapunov
4. Time-Varying and Adaptive Systems
In most control systems the dynamic characteristics of the
controlled process generally vary under actual operating conditions.
This variation may be caused by normal deterioration of the system
components, or drifting of parameters, or other reasons. Usually,
slight variations of system parameters can be counteracted by using
feedback. However, should the variations become large, the system
must be considered to have time-varying characteristics. This initiated
the studies of time-varying systems and adaptive systems. In sampled-
data control systems, a sampler with time-varying rate may be
introduced purposely for the sake of improving system performance.
Adaptive sampled-data systems are increasing in practical applications.
These systems are designed so that the time characteristics of the
compensator or the sampling scheme may vary according to the
time-varying characteristics of the controlled dynamic process.
The methods of analysis of time-varying and adaptive sampled-
data systems are generally of the following types: (1) matrix and
difference equation (with time-varying coefficients) and (2) statistical
methods.
REFERENCES
Bertram, J. E., and Franklin, G., "Sampled-Data Feedback Improves System
Response," Control Engineering, 2, September 1955, pp. 107–111.
Burdick, C., "Digital Computer Runs Hot Plate Mill," Control Engineering,
7, January 1960, pp. 126-130.
Gimpel, D. J., "Sampled-data Systems," Control Engineering, 4, February 1957,
pp. 99–106.
Gouy, G., "On a Constant Temperature Oven," J. Physique, 6, Ser. 3, 1897,
pp. 479-483.
Helm, E. A., "Analysis of Digital Systems," Proc. Computers in Control Systems
Conference, October 1957.
James, H. M., Nichols, N. B., and Phillips, R. S., Theory of Servomechanisms,
Chapter 5, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1947.

Sec. 1.3
INTRODUCTION 17
Jury, E. I., "Recent Advances in the Field of Sampled-Data and Digital
Control Systems," Proc. of the Conference of the International Federation of
Automatic Control, Moscow, 1960, pp. 240-246.
Jury, E. I., Sampled-Data Control Systems, New York: John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., 1958.
Kompass, E. J., "What About Digital Transducers?" Control Engineering, July
1953, pp. 94-99.
Kuo, B. C., Automatic Control Systems, Chapter 10, Englewood Cliffs, N. J.:
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1962.
Linvill, W. K., "Sampled-data Control Systems Studied Through Comparison
With Amplitude Modulation," Trans. A. I. E. E., 70, Part II, 1951, pp. 1779-
1788.
MacColl, L. A., Fundamental Theory of Servomechanisms," Chapter 10, Princeton,
N. J.: D. VanNostrand Company, Inc., 1945.
Oldenbourg, R. C., and Sartorius, R., The Dynamics of Automatic Controls,
Chapter 5, Publication of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
New York, 1948.
Pantazelas, P. G., "Sampled-Data Analysis of a Drift-Stabilization Systems,"
A. I. E. E., Conference Paper No. CP 56-961, October 1956.
Ragazzini, J. R., and Franklin, G. F., Sampled-Data Control Systems, New
York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1958.
Ragazzini, J. R., and Zadah, L. H., "The Analysis of Sampled-data System,"
Trans. A. I. E. E., 71, Part II, 1952, pp. 225-234.
Tou, J. T., Digital and Sampled-Data Control Systems, New York: McGraw-
Hill Book Company, 1959.
Tsypkin, Y., Theory of Pulse Systems, Moscow: State Press for Physics and
Mathematical Literature, 1959.
Smith, C. H., Lawden, D. F., and Bailey, A. E., "Characteristics of Sampling
Servo Systems," Automatic and Manual Control, A. Tustin, ed., London:
Butterworth's Schientific Publications, 1952.
Thomasson, L. T., "Digital Servomechanisms, Electronics, 27, No. 8, August
1954, pp. 134-139.

2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS
2.1 INTRODUCTION
RODUC
The information received by a sampled-data control system is not
continuous with respect to time but is in the form of pulses occuring
at discrete instants of time. No signal is supplied at all during the
periods separating the information carrying pulses. Mathematically,
the pulse-data signal can be represented by a sampling operation that
may be adequately described by a fictitious component called the
sampling switch or sampler, as shown in Fig. 2-1a, or a pulse modu
Pulse train p(t)
Carrier
e(t)
e (1)
(p)
e(t)
Pulse
modulator
ex(t)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2-1 Sampling process described by fictitious components.
(a) Sampler as a sampling device. (b) Pulse-modulator as a
sampling device.
lator as shown in Fig. 2-1b. If the operation of the sampling switch
is periodic with respect to time, that is, the sampler closes for a very
short interval p at discrete periodic instants t = 0, T, 2T, 3T, . . .,
† W. K. Linvill, “Sampled-Data Control Systems Studied Through Comparison of
Sampling with Impulse Modulation," Trans. A. I. E. E., 70, 1951, pp. 1779-1799.
18

Sec. 2.1
THE SAMPLING PROCESS 19
le(t)
ep (1)
T+p
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2-2 Typical waveforms of the input and output signals of a
uniform-rate sampling device. (a) Input signal to sampler or pulse
modulator. (b) Output of sampler or pulse modulator.
nT, . . ., the sampling is said to have a uniform rate. The wave-
forms of the input and the output signals of a typical uniform-rate
sampling device are shown in Fig. 2-2; the input signal e(t) is a
continuous function of time, but the output of the sampling switch,
denoted by e(t), is a train of amplitude-modulated pulses of widths
Poccurring at the sampling instants t = 0, T, 2T, 3T, . nT, .
In other words, at t = 0, the sampler closes for p seconds; and during
this short intervale (t) = e(t). After t = p second, the sampler opens,
and the output signal is zero until the next sampling instant at t = T.
In general, the pulses in a sampled-data system may be supplied
at a variable rate, then the duration between consecutive pulses is
not constant. A simple example of the variable-rate sampled-data
control system is a cyclic variable-rate system in which the pulsed-
data occur at a cyclic rate as shown in Fig. 2-3. Not uncommonly,
3T
T
2T
4T
5T
Fig. 2-3 Output of a cyclic-rate sampling device.
several independent sampling operations appear at different points of
a sampled-data system. The sampling rates of the samplers need not
be synchronous (operate at same instants of time). This type of
system is generally described as a multirate sampling system. In more
† J. Tou, “Optimum Control Through Tuned Sampling," Proc. National Electronics
Conference, 1959.
G. Kranc, "Compensation of an Error-Sampled System by a Multirate Controller,"
Trans. A. I. E. E., 76, Part II, 1957, pp. 149–159.

20 THE SAMPLING PROCESS
Chap. 2
complicated cases the sampling operation may be entirely at random,†
i. e., the interval between successive samples may be thought of as
to follow some random scheme.
2.2 MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF THE SAMPLING
PROCESS
For the purpose of introducing the mathematical description of the
sampling operation, we shall discuss only uniform-rate sampling at
present. As described in the preceding section, the sampling process
may be represented by a fictitious pulse-amplitude modulation process
that converts a continuous signal into a train of amplitude-modulated
pulses. In the uniform-rate sampling the carrier of the pulse-modulator
is a unit-pulse train consisting of a train of pulses of unity height.
The interval between two consecutive pulses is the sampling period
T, and the pulse width p is often referred to as the sampling dura-
tion. The unit-pulse train used as the carrier of the pulse modulator
p(t)
1
-2T -T-p -T
T T+P 2T 2T+p
Fig. 2-4 The unit pulse train.
is shown in Fig. 2-4. Therefore, when the input of the sampling
device is a continuous function of time, the output of the device is
a train of pulses whose envelope is identical to the input signal
during the sampling durations.
We shall now investigate the frequency spectrum of the sampled
output e(t). In general, we may ask: "If the input function e(t)
contains no frequency component higher than we radians per second,
what frequency components will be contained in e(t)?" By inspec-
tion of the time response of Fig. 2-2, we shall expect to find much
higher frequency components in e(t) than in e(t) because of the
discontinuity characteristic of the pulse train. We can describe the
operation of the pulse-amplitude modulator by
+ R. E. Kalman, "Analysis and Synthesis of Linear Systems Operating on Randomly
Sampled-Data," (Doctoral thesis, Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University,
New York, 1957).

Sec. 2.2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS 21
e(t) = = p(t)e(t)
(2-1)
where e(t) is the continuous input signal, e(t) is the output signal
of the modulator, and p(t) denotes the unit-pulse train carrier. Since
the sampling period T is assumed to be constant, p(t) is a periodic
function; p(t) can be expanded into a Fourier series.
Hence
∞
=
p(t) Σ Creinw
(2-2)
N=-∞
where w, is the sampling frequency in radians per second and w、 is
related to the sampling period T by
"
. ws = 2π/Т
Ca denotes the Fourier coefficients and is given by
1 T
inw,t
C₂ = = √," p(t) e-mo
Cn
Since p(t) = 1 for 0 <t<p, Eq. (2-4) becomes
(2-3)
(2-4)
C₂ = = √²
S
e
-jnwt dt
=
1- e
jnws T
-jnw,p
(2-5)
From simple trigonometric identities, C, is written
Сп
=
sin (nw.p2)-jnw, p2
(nw,T/2)
Substituting Cn into Eq. (2-2), we have
or
p(t) =
Σ sin (nw.p2) e-mo.p.2 mot
N=1∞
(nw, T2)
C₂ = £ sin (nw, p 2)
Сп
Τ
T (nw.p.2)
e-inw, p 2
The output of the sampler can now be written as
e(t) = Σ Cre(t)einw,t
N--00
(2-6)
F(2-7)
"
(2-8)
(2-9)
where C is given in Eq. (2-8). The Fourier transform of e(t) is
E; (jw) = [e; (t)]
J[e*
(2-10)
By using the shifting theorem of the Fourier transform which states
that
we have
J[einw,te(t)] = E(jw – jnws)
00
E(jw) = Σ C₁E( jw – jnw.)
7=-00
Equation (2-12) can also be written as
0
E(jw) = Σ CE( jw + jnws)
CE(jw+jnws)
(2-11)
(2-12)
(2-13)
N=1∞

22
Chap. 2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS
since n is summed from - ∞ to +∞.
Taking the limit as n-0 in Eq. (2-8), we have
Co= lim Cn
=
p/T
n-0
Hence from Eq. (2-12),
E*
Ez (jw)\n=0 = — E(jw)
(2-14)
(2-15)
Equation (2-15) shows an important fact in that the frequency com-
ponents contained in the original continuous function of time, e(t),
are still present in the output e(t), except that they are multiplied
by the factor p/T. For n=0, Cn is a complex quantity; but the
magnitude of Cn may be written as
| C₂ = £sin (nw.p/2)
T (nw.p/2)
The magnitude of E(jw) is
| E* (jw)| = | Ž C„E(jw + jnw,)
N=-∞
(2-16)
(2-17)
The frequency spectrum of the periodic pulses p(t) is simply a plot
of the Fourier coefficient Cn as a function of w. The amplitude plot
of Cn is depicted in Fig. 2-5a. We see that the amplitude spectrum
of C is not continuous, but rather it is a line spectrum at discrete
frequencies of zero and nw, rad/sec, where n is a series of integers.
The envelope of the spectrum is described by Eq. (2-16) and the
amplitude of the envelope goes to zero at frequencies of 2πk/p, where
p is the pulse width of p(t) and k = ±1, ±2, ±3, . . .. Because of
the discrete property of Cn we can now write Eq. (2-17) in the
following form:
| E‡(jw)| = Σ |Сn|| E( jw + jnws)|
(2-18)
In order to illustrate the magnitude spectrum of the sampler output,
E(jw), we assume that the spectrum of the continuous input time
function e(t) is as shown in Fig. 2-5b. By use of Eq. (2-18), the
spectrum of the sampled signal is constructed in Fig. 2-5c. It is
interesting to note that |E(jw) | consists of not only the fundamental
component of E(jw) but also an infinite number of spectra called
the complementary components. The nth complementary component
in the output spectrum is obtained by multiplying |E(jw)| by its
corresponding Fourier coefficient |C| and shifting it by nws, where
n = ±1, ±2, ±3, . . .. Therefore, we may visualize the sampling
device as a harmonic generator whose output contains the weighted
fundamental component plus all the weighted complementary com-
ponents at all frequencies separated by the sampling frequency. The

Sec. 2.2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS 23
- 4ως -3ως -2ως -ws
(a)
-
|Col
P/T
Equ2-15
ως
2ως 3ως 4ws Aπ
11 |E(jw)|
(b)
-wc wc
|E* (jw)|
p/T
-4ws -3ws -2ws -ws
wc +ws 2ως
3ως 4ως
(c)
-2π
-4ws-2ws
||E**(jw) |
0
2ws 4ws 2πT
ATT
1
-5 ως 3 ως έως έως 3 ως 5 ως
(d)
Fig. 2-5 Amplitude spectra of input and output signals of a finite
pulse-width sampling device. (a) Amplitude spectrum of unit
pulse train p(t). (b) Amplitude spectrum of continuous input
function e(t) (c) Amplitude spectrum of sampler output. Sampl-
ing frequency is higher than twice the maximum signal frequency,
(ws > 2wc). (d) Amplitude spectrum of sampler output. Sampling
frequency is less than twice the maximum signal frequency,
(w, <2wc).
band around zero frequency still carries essentially all the information
contained in the continuous input signal, but the same information
also repeats along the frequency axis; the amplitude of each com-
ponent is weighted by the magnitude of its corresponding Fourier
coefficient C. It should be pointed out here that the frequency
spectrum shown in Fig. 2-5c is sketched with the assumption that
the sampling frequency w, is greater than twice the highest frequency

24
Chap. 2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS
contained in e(t); that is, ws > 2wc. If ws < 2we distortion in the
frequency spectrum of | E(jw) will appear because of the over-
lapping of the signal components. As shown in Fig. 2-5d, if ws < 2wc,
the spectrum of |E(jw)| around zero frequency bears little resem-
blance to that of the original signal. Therefore, although the original
signal can be recovered from the spectrum shown in Fig. 2-5c by
means of a low-pass filter the complementary components of the
sampler output overlap each other as shown in Fig. 2-5d, and the
input signal cannot be reconstructed even by means of an ideal low-
pass filter.
An alternate description of the sampled signal e(t) can be obtained
by means of the complex convolution method. With reference to
Fig. 2-2 and Eq. (2-1), the Laplace transform of e(t) is written.
or
E(s) = L[e* (t)] = L[e(t)p(t)]
E(s) = E(s) * P(s)
(2-19)
(2-20)
where E(s) and P(s) are the Laplace transforms of e(t) and p(t),
respectively. The symbol, “*,” in Eq. (2-20) denotes the complex
convolution operation. Considering that the unit pulse train is a sum
of successively delayed positive and negative step functions, P(s)
can be written as
P(s) = ㅎ​--
e¯ps + e-Ts
—
e-(T+p)s + ... + e-KTS
− (kT + p)s
e
+
.
1
(2-21)
Representing P(s) in a closed form, we have
=
1
--
e-ps
s(1-e-TS)
P(s)
Equation (2-20) now reads
E(s) = E(s) *
(2-22)
1
--
e-ps
s(1-e-Ts)
(2-23)
It follows from the definitions of the complex convolution that
Hence
+ joo
-
27j √.~j~ E(§)P(s — §) dĘ
Jc-joo
1
E(s)
=
1
+ joo
E(s) =
2πj
Set to E(§)
e-p(8-5)
(s
-
Ë)(1
-
1
-
(2-24)
(2-25)
c-joo
σ₁ <c<σ
029
where & is a dummy variable; ₁ < c < σ - σ₂, σ> max (1, 2, σ1 + σ₂),
where is the real part of s and σ, and σ, are the abscissas of conver-
gence of E() and P(§), respectively. The path of integration of Eq.
(2-25) is along the line from cjo to c + joo in the complex §
†M. F. Gardner and J. L. Barnes, Transients in Linear Systems, Vol. I (New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1942), pp. 275-278.

Sec. 2.2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS 25
+
1
Im
6jwst
5jwst
4jws
3jws
2jws
just
c+j∞
X
X
X
X
X
S
X
-plane
Poles of
1-e-T(s-g)
(s-(1-e-T(S-))
R∞
X
O
X
Poles of E()
- jws
X
-2jws
R4∞
X
-3jws
X
-4jws
X
-5jws
-6jws
c-joo
Re
Fig. 2-6 Paths of contour integration in the right-half -plane
and the left-half §-plane.
plane as shown in Fig. 2-6. The convolution integral of Eq. (2-25)
may be carried out by taking the contour integration along a path
formed by the c-joo to c + j∞ line, and a semicircle of infinitely
large radius going around either the right-half or the left-half -plane.
The contour integral is then evaluated by means of the residues.
theorem of complex variables. In other words, Eq. (2-25) may be
written in the following forms:
(s
-
1
§)
(1)
E(s)
1
=
-
2 x j fr, E(§)
2 xj ƒ E(§)
(s
1
e-p(s-E)
(1 − e−T( s − t)) d§
1
-
----
e-p(s-E)
-
§) (1 − e˜˜(³ – §)) d§
(2-26)
+ R. V. Churchill, Introduction to Complex Variables and Applications (New York;
McGraw Hill Book Company, 1948).

26
Chap. 2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS
1
1
(2) E(s) =
2 xj §r, E(§)
-
e-p(s-E)
ƒ E (§) ( s
-
− §) ( 1 -
-
1
2πj
1
-
( s − §) (1 − e− ™‹• − t)j dž
-
2
-
1 e-p(8-5)
-
(2-27)
where I'₁ is a closed path enclosing the entire finite left half of the
-plane and T2 is a closed path enclosing the right half of the
-plane. The two paths T, and I, are depicted in Fig. 2-6. In order
to utilize the theorem of residues, we have to study the poles and
zeros of E() and P(s §). Normally, the poles of E() are con-
sidered to be in the left half of the plane and are finite in number,
-
but P(s) has simple poles at
n
= s +
2πnj
T
= s + jnws
∞ <n (integer) < ∞ (2-28)
where w, is the sampling frequency in radians per second. Equation
(2-28) shows that the poles of P(s) are infinite in number and
are located at frequency intervals of nw, (n = 0, and all integers)
along the path of Re(§) = Re(s) in the plane. Typical pole dis-
trubutions of E(§) and P(s — §) are shown in Fig. 2-6. If the
function E() has at least one more zero than pole at §
--
-
lim E() = 0
∞ - 1
=
∞, that is
(2-29)
the second term of Eq. (2-27) is zero, since the integral along the
infinite-radius semi-circle in the left half of the -plane vanishes.
Equation (2-26) then becomes
E(s) =
1
27j fr., E(§)
-
1
་
e-p(s-k)
-
S §)(1 − e−T( s − }))
dę
(2-30)
From the theorem of residues the contour integral of Eq. (2-30) is
equal to the sum of the residues of the integrand at the poles en-
closed by the closed path I₁. Therefore,
Ex (s)
-
Σ Residues of E()
At the poles
of E(s)
-
1
----
e-p(s-E)
-
(s — §)(1 − e−T(8 - }))
(2-31)
Equation (2-31) can be written in a more specific form if we assume
that E(§) is a rational function with only k simple poles. Then
k
E(s)
=
Σ
72 1
N(n)
D'(§n) (1
1
--
e~P(8 - kn)
e¯T'( s − kn) ) ( s − §n
(2-32)
where
E(§) =
N(E)
(2-33)
D()
D'(n)
dD(§)
=
(2-34)
dę
t
and designates the poles of E(§).

Sec. 2.2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS 27
Now let us evaluate E*(s) by solving the contour integral around
the right-half-plane along the path I. In this case as approaches
infinity, the integral along the circular portion of I', will again vanish
provided that E(§) satisfies Eq. (2-29). Equation (2-27) now reads
1
E*(s) =
2πj §r, E(§)
(s
----
1
-
2
e-p(8-5)
§)(1 − e−T(s – §)
Applying the residues theorem, we have
E(s)
=
-
Σ
Residues of E(§)
At the poles of
1-e-p(s)
( s − §)(1 − e− P( s − }))
αξ
1 e˜p(8-5)
(2-35)
(s
-
E)(1 e
"(s-
----
(2-36)
Since P(s) has only simple poles located at periodic intervals
along Re() = Re(s) in the -plane, Eq. (2-36) is written
E(s)
=
Σ
N(n)
D' (§n)
·E( §n)
(2-37)
N = -∞
where = s + jnw, denotes the poles of P(s- §).
Also
and
n
=
-
N(n) = 1 − e−P(s − ) | = s + jNw,
=
1-e+inw.p
(2-38)
D'(n)
=
dj (s
de
[(s
-
· §)(1 − e−T($ - §))];
=
} = s + jn ws
+jnwsT (2-39)
Therefore, Eq. (2-37) becomes
E(s) =
Σ
1
---
e-jnw, p
jnws T
72=00
E(s + jnws)
It is apparent that Eq. (2-40) and Eq. (2-13) are identical.
The Sampling Theorem
(2-40)
The simple physical reasoning made in the preceding section about
the minimum sampling frequency for signal recovery actually answers
a very basic yet important question in regard to the proper rate of
sampling. In general, if sampling is used in a given system, we may
ask the following question: What are the limitations on the rate of
sampling? It is easy to see that theoretically there is no upper limit
on the sampling frequency. As a matter of fact, when the sampling.
frequency approaches infinity (if this is physically possible for a
sampler), we approach the continuous case. As far as the lower
limit is concerned, intuitively, we know that, if the continuous
signal changes radically with respect to time, the signal's bandwidth
must be relatively high, and sampling the signal at too low a rate
may lose vital information on the signal between the sampling in-
stants, and consequently, we may not be able to reconstruct the

28
Chap. 2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS
continuous signal from the information contained in the sampled data.
From the amplitude spectra shown in Fig. 2-5, the lowest sampling
frequency for possible signal reconstruction is 2we, where we is the
highest frequency contained in e(t). Formally, this is known as the
sampling theorem. The theorem states that if a signal contains no
frequency higher than we radians per second, it is completely charac-
terized by the values of the signal measured at instants of time
separated by T = {(2π/wc) second. Note that in practice system
stability of closed-loop systems and other factors also dictate the
choice of the sampling frequency and may make it necessary to sample.
at a rate much higher than this theoretical minimum. Furthermore,
strictly speaking a band-limited signal does not exist physically in
communication or control systems. All physical signals do contain
components of a large frequency range. In general, because the
amplitudes of the higher frequency components are greatly diminished,
a band-limited signal is assumed. Therefore, in practice these facts,
plus the unrealizability of an ideal low pass filter, make impossible
the exact reproduction of a continuous signal from the sampled signal
even if the sampling theorem is satisfied.
An interesting note on the sampling theorem should be added
here. A signal can still be defined completely by sampling it at a rate
less than 2. radians per second provided that the derivatives of the
signal are known at the sampling instants as well as the function
amplitude sample information. To be more specific, L. J. Fogel has
proved that if a signal contains no frequency higher than we radians
per second, it is completely characterized by the values e(*) (nT),
e(k-1) (nT), . . ., e'(nT), and e(nT), (n = 0, 1, 2, . . .) of the signal
measured at instants of time separated by T = (k + 1)(2π/wc)
į
second, where e*) (nT) = d e(t)/dt = nr. This means that when the
values of the first derivative of e(t) at t = nT, e'(nT), for n = 0, 1,
2,..., are given in addition to the values of e(nT), the maximum.
allowable sampling time is increased to T = 27/wc, which is twice
the time required when e(nT) alone is measured. The addition of
each succeeding derivative allows the time between samples (sampling
time) to become larger according to T = (k + 1)(2π/we), where k
is the order of the highest derivative when all lower ordered deri-
vatives are observed for each sample.
Further discussions of the signal-recovery and the sampling
frequency are presented in the following sections.
R. M. Oliver, J. R. Pierce, C. E. Shannon, "The Philosophy of Pulse Code Modu-
lation," Proc. I. R. E., 36, No. 11, November 1948, pp. 1324-1331.
L. J. Fogel, "A Note on the Sampling Theorem," Trans. on Information Theory,
March 1955, pp. 47-48.

Sec. 2.3
THE SAMPLING PROCESS 29
2.3 MATHEMATICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE IDEAL
SAMPLING PROCESS-THE IDEAL SAMPLER
In the preceding section, mathematical analysis of an actual
sampling process is performed by the methods of Fourier transform
and complex convolution. The characteristics of the sampling opera-
tion are described in both the time domain and the frequency domain.
However, exact analysis of sampled-data systems with finite pulse-
width considerations is quite complex. In general, to simplify the
analysis and synthesis techniques, the sampling device may be replaced
by an "ideal sampler" whose output signal e* (t) contains a train of
impulses. This approximation is justified if the pulse-width of the
sampler output is very small when compared with the dominant time
constant of the continuous signal e(t), and to the sampling period.
e(t)
e*(t)
X
T
Fig. 2-7 Model of an ideal sampler.
A model of the ideal sampler is shown in Fig. 2-7. When the input
to the ideal sampler is a continuous function e(t) as shown in Fig.
2-8a, the output of the sampler, denoted by e*(t), is a train of
amplitude-modulated impulses and is related to e(t) by
e*(t) = e(t)d,(t)
where (t) is a unit-impulse train; that is,
8,(t) = Σd(t - nT)...
n = -∞
(2-41)
(2-42)
where (t - nT) represents an impulse of unit area (or strength)
occurring at time t nT. Hence Eq. (2-41) can be written as
-
00
00
e* (t) = e(t) Σ_d(t − nT) =
-
Σe(nT)(t − nT)
---
(2-43)
N=1∞
If it is assumed that e(t) is zero for t< 0, Eq. (2-43) reads.
+ G. Farmanfarma, "Study of Finite Pulsed Feedback Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E.,
Part II, July 1958.
J. Tou, “Analysis of Sampled-Data Control Systems with Finite Sampling Dura-
tion," Proc. National Electronics Conference, 1957.
Similar to the discussion given in Sec. 2-2, the pulse-amplitude modulation may
be replaced by an impulse modulator whose carrier is a train of impulses each with
unity area.

30
Chap. 2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS
18
00
e*(t) = Σ e(nT)8(t − nT)
n=0
(2-44)
Equation (2-44) indicates that the output of the ideal sampler is a
train of impulses whose respective impulse areas (strengths) are
equal to the magnitudes of the input signal at the corresponding
sampling instants nT. The operation of the ideal sampler according
to Eqs. (2-41) and (2-44) is illustrated in Fig. 2-8.
e(t)t
;)
OT (1) 1₁
(a)
-27 Ó
-T
e (t)
2T 4T 6T
8T1OT...
T 3T 5T 7T 9T
(b)
2T 4T 6T 8T 10T
3T 5T 7T
9T
(c)
Fig. 2-8 Signal waveforms illustrating the sampling operation of
an ideal sampler. (a) Input signal to sampler. (b) Unit-impulse
train (train of impulses with unity area). (c) Output signal of
sampler.
Equation (2-44) describes the operation of the ideal sampling
device only in the time domain. In order to study the frequency
behavior of the sampling process, we must obtain the transform of
e*(t). Different transform representations of the ideal sampler output
are derived in the following explanations:

Sec. 2.3
THE SAMPLING PROCESS 31
1. The Method of Laplace Transforms
Taking the Laplace transform of e*(t) directly from Eq. (2-44),
we have
E* (s) = £[e*(t)] = Σ e(nT)d(t − nT)
n == 0
Since the Laplace transform of the unit impulse (t
Eq. (2-45) becomes
00
E* (s) = Σ e(nT)e¯nts
n-0
(2-45)
- nT) is ents
d
(2-46)
Therefore, E*(s) represents the ordinary Laplace transform of the
sampled signał e*(t). Since e*(t) describes only the values of e(t) at
the sampling instants, note that E*(s) carries no information con-
cerning the behavior of the function e(t) during the sampling period
T. An interesting fact is that Eq. (2-46) is very similar to the
defining equation of the Laplace transform of e(t); that is,
∞
E(s)
=
= S e(t) e²=" dt
(2-47)
Therefore, E(s) is the transform of a continuous time function e(t),
whereas E*(s) is the transform of e*(t), where e*(t) is a train of
impulses modulated by e(t). One should not be alarmed by the fact
that E*(s) in Eq. (2-46) is an infinite series. In general, if the
Laplace transform of e(t) is a rational function, E*(s) can always be
written in a closed form. The following examples illustrate this
property of E*(s) and the general application of Eq. (2-46).
Example 2-1
Consider that a unit-step function e(t) = u(t) is sampled by an ideal
sampler at intervals of T seconds. From Eq. (2-44), the sampled signal (output
of the sampler) is
e* (t) = Σ d(t − nT)
-
The Laplace transform of e* (t) is
E*(s) = Σe-nts
=
N=0
=
--
1
e
n = 0
(2-48)
1 +
+ e-2Ts +
for e-ST<1
(2-49)
Ts
Example 2-2
If the input signal to an ideal sampler is e(t) = e¯', the values of e(t) at
the sampling instants are described by e(nT) = e¯¹T. Therefore, by use of
Eq. (2-46)

32
Chap. 2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS
00
E*(s) = Σ
n = 0
e -nTe¬nts = Σ e¬nT(s+1)
1
=
n = 0
for e-(+)<1
· T(8 + 1)
(2-50)
2. The Method of Complex Convolution
The Laplace transform of the output of the ideal sampler can
also be obtained from the complex convolution method used in Sec.
2.2. After multiplying the magnitude of the pulses in the unit pulse
train p(t) by 1/p (p = pulse width) and taking the limit as p
approaches zero, we have the train of unit impulses shown in Fig.
2-8b. Thus E*(s) can be obtained directly from E*(s); that is,
E*(s) = lim E, (s)
P→o p
(2-51)
First, let us consider Eq. (2-26). Multiplying both sides of Eq. (2-26)
by 1/p and letting p approach zero, we have
E*(s) = lim
1
lim 1/1 27; [ƒ, E(§)P(s – §) d§ – ƒ E(§)P(s – §) dĘ
lim + P(s
--
p→o p
E)
=
1
-
e
1
–
- T(S - §)
]
(2-52)
(2-53)
Since
E*(s) is written ast
1
1
-
1
1
-
e
T (8
E* (s) = 27 j [§, E(§) 1 — 2 - x-x dɛ – ƒ E(§), — ' x-n dɛ]
Γι
-
- T( })
(2-54)
If E(§) satisfies the condition given in Eq. (2–29), the second integral
of Eq. (2-54) vanishes; and if E() is a rational function having k
simple poles, from the residues theorem
k
E*(s) = Σ
N = 1
N(En)
D'(n) 1
1
-
- T(8 — §n)
e
(2-55)
where N() and D'(,) are defined in Eqs. (2-33) and (2-34), respec-
tively. The two expressions in Eqs. (2-46) and (2-55) are essentially
the same although they are of different forms. The application of
Eq. (2-55) will now be illustrated by a simple example.
Example 2-3
Consider the same signal e(t) = e' used in Example 2-2. In this example,
the Laplace transform of the sampled signal is to be derived from Eq. (2-55).
Since the Laplace transform of e(t) is 1/(s + 1), in Eq. (2-55), N(§₁) = 1
and D(§₁) = § + 1. E(§) has a simple pole at = −1. Thus

Sec. 2.3
THE SAMPLING PROCESS 33
D'(Ë) =
=
dD(§)
αξ
= 1
=-1
From Eq. (2-55) we have
1
E*(s)
-
1
-
e
(2-56)
·T(8 + 1)
(2-57)
which is identical to the result obtained in Example 2-2 by using Eq. (2-46).
However, the two expressions we have for E*(s) in Eqs. (2-−46)
and (2-55) fail to indicate the frequency domain characteristics of
the sampled signal e*(t). Previously, we have shown that an actual
sampling device (finite pulse-width sampler) resembles a harmonic
generator that duplicates the weighted amplitude spectrum of the
input signal at integral multiples of the sampling frequency. When
the finite-width pulses are approximated by impulses, we should per-
haps expect the sampler to act more like a harmonic generator; and
indeed it does, as for we shall show. Note that the amplitude spectrum
of the output signal of the ideal sampler contains all the complemen-
tary components in addition to the primary component and that the
amplitudes of all components are equal and unattenuated.
Now using Eq. (2-27), E*(s) is written as
E*(s) = lim
p→o p
= lim
Et(s)
1
-
-
lim 27 jp [ §, E(§)P(s – §) d§ — ƒƒ E(§)P(s – §) d§]
р→0
1
1
–
–
-T(S-)
1
T(8-5)
e
(2-58)
27, ( §;, E(§) — no d§ - ƒ E(§) ₁ – ? – dɛ ]
1
- e
or
E*(s) =
e-T(-)
(2-59)
In this case since 1/1 - e - has a simple pole at infinity in the
-plane, the second integral of Eq. (2-58) along the semicircle of
infinite radius in the right half of the plane may not vanish. As a
matter of fact, if the degree of the denominator of E() in έ is not
higher than the degree of the numerator by at least two, the integral
along the semicircle may have a finite value or may
converge.
even
Let us assume that E(§) satisfies the following condition:
lim ¿E(§) = e(0*) = lim e(t)
t-.0*
not
(2-60)
In other words, the degree of the denominator of E(§) is higher
than that of the numerator by only one, and the initial value of the
time function e(t) is e(0*). We can write

34
Chap. 2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS
lim E(§)
=
lim
e(0*)
00 + {
É
Then, the second integral of Eq. (2-59) becomes
(2-61)
1
2πj
ƒE(§) 1
1
1
-7/2
lim e(0*)/§
-
e
r(s — §) de
(2-62)
2πj J + x/2 1 e
-
Letting
=
reje
(2-63)
2,
on the semicircle of infinite radius of I, and since as r∞,
e-T ( s − §)
> 0, we have
1
E(§)
1
1
-T(S-
E)
e
27jf (t) - d = 2jre" do
2πj
1 -x/2
+
= -e(0*)/2
(2-64)
Hence the integral along the semicircle in the right half of the
-plane is equal to -e(0*)/2. The first integral of Eq. (2-59) is
evaluated by means of the residues theorem and similar steps as in-
volved in Eqs. (2-35) through (2-40). Thus
1
2πj Jг
1
00
E(§) — — — E(s + jnw.) (2-65)
1
。-T(s— §) ag = √ n = -∞
e
and from Eq. (2-59) we have
00
E* (s) = = Σ E(s + jnws) + e(0*)
T
N = -∞
2
(2-66)
Equation (2-66) gives the Laplace transform of the output signal of
an ideal sampler (impulse modulator) when the input time function
e(t) has a jump of e(0*) at t = 0. However, most of the closed-loop
system transfer functions involved in control systems usually have
at least two more poles than zeros, or E(s) satisfies the following
condition:
lim sE(s) = 0
$ → 00
(2-67)
Then the second integral of Eq. (2-59) is zero (since e(0*) = 0),
and Eq. (2-66) is simply
E*(s)
=
17 E(s + jnws)
T
(2-68)
This result can also be obtained directly from Eq. (2-40) by multi-
plying E(s) by 1/p and taking the limit of the product as p
approaching zero. The following example illustrates the difference in
applicability between Eqs. (2-66) and (2-68).
Example 2-4
Let the input signal to an ideal sampler be a unit-step function. The
Laplace transform of the sampled output e*(t) is desired. Since the input e(t)

Sec. 2.3
THE SAMPLING PROCESS 35
has a jump discontinuity at t = 0, use of Eq. (2-68) may be expected to lead
to inaccurate results. This error is indicated by substituting the Laplace trans-
form of e(t) into Eq. (2-68) yielding
00
1
E* (s) = − Σ E(s + jnw,) = † Σ
T
which can also be written
E*(s)
=
N = ∞
Ts
14
+
T
= +
est
00
Σ
N ==
1
T
1
s + jnws
(2-69)
(플​)
=
+e +
-ST
-2$T
1 2
+
2s
5² + n² w 2 coth (57)
1
(2-70)
Only one-half of the value of e(0*) is sampled, since the first term of Eq.
(2-70) is 1/2. The correct answer of E*(s) is obtained if Eq. (2-66) is used.
From Eq. (2-66) or Eq. (2-68) we see that the ideal sampler is
again a harmonic generator. The sampler reproduces the spectrum of
the continuous input time function e(t) as well as the sidebands
(complementary components) at integral multiples of the sampling
frequency; and all components have the same amplitude of 1/T.
+1E (jw)l
IE* (jw)l
1/T
i-w
(a)
+wc
- 2ως
-ws
-wc
+wc
ως
2ως
O
(b)
Fig. 2-9 Amplitude spectra of input and output signals of an
ideal sampler (impulse modulator). (a) Amplitude spectrum of
continuous input function e(t). (b) Amplitude spectrum of sampler
output. Sampling frequency is higher than twice the maximum
signal frequency, (w, > 2wc).
Assuming that the amplitude spectrum of a continuous signal is as
shown in Fig. 2-9a, the corresponding amplitude spectrum of the
sampled signal e*(t) when w. <2wc is shown in Fig. 2-9b, where ws
is the sampling frequency in rad/sec and we is the highest frequency
contained in e(t). Again, if the sampling frequency is less than 2we,
distortion will occur in the output spectrum because of the over-
lapping of the sidebands in |E*(jw)].
Some s-plane Properties of E* (8)
We have shown in the preceding section that the most significant

36
Chap. 2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS
meaning of Eq. (2-68) is that it clearly indicates the effect of an
ideal sampler in terms of the frequency domain behavior of e(t) and
e* (t). Two other important properties of E*(s) are also worth
mentioning.
(1) E* (8) is a periodic function with period jo,.
The property of E*(s) as a periodic function is apparent in view
of Eq. (2-68) and Fig. 2-9b. Analytically, we can show this fact by
substituting s+jmws for s in Eq. (2-46), where m is an integer.
00
-
E* (s + jmws) = Σe(nT) e¯n(s+jmw,)r ΣenT)ers (2-71)
Therefore,
N = 0
E*(s + jmws) = E*(s)
n = 0
(2-72)
In other words, given any point s s₁ in the s-plane, the function
E*(s) has the same value at all periodic points
s = s₁ + jmws (m
=
integers from ∞ to +∞).
Ajw
The s-plane
--7ws/2
5₁+13ws
-5ws/2
о
Complementary S₁+j2ws
strips
--3ws/2
O
S₁ + jws
-ws/2
Primary
strip
S₁
--ws/2
O
51 - ίως
-3ws 12
O
Complementary S₁-j2ws
strips
о
S₁-j3ws
-5ws/2
Fig. 2-10 Periodic strips in the s-plane.
This equality is illustrated in Fig. 2-10. Thus we can divide the
s-plane into an infinite number of periodic strips as shown in Fig.
2-10. The strip between -ws/2 and +ws/2 is called the primary strip
and all others occurring at higher frequencies are designated as the
complementary strips. The function E*(s) has the same value at all
congruent points in the various periodic strips.

Sec. 2.4
THE SAMPLING PROCESS 37
(2) If the function E(s) has a pole at s = 81, then, E* (8) must have
poles at s 8₁ + jm∞, (m = integers from -∞ to +∞).
The fact that this statement is true can be observed easily from
Eq. (2-68). A set of hypothetical pole configuration of E(s) and the
corresponding E*(s) is shown in Fig. 2-11.
jw
s-plane
X
x j4ws
X
xj3ws
X
Poles of E (s)
X
j2ws
x jws
X
x
X
X
x-jws
x-j2ws
x-j3ws
X-j4ws
Fig. 2-11 Periodicity of the poles of E*(s).
2.4 SUMMARY
The nature and the operation of the sampling process have been
discussed in this chapter. The sampling operation may be considered
as either a fictitious sampler or a pulse-amplitude modulation process.
The sampled signal contains all the sidebands (complementary
components) about integral multiples of the sampling frequency.
Theoretically, if the continuous signal is assumed to be band-limited,
then Shannon's sampling theorem states that the necessary condition.
for recovery of the continuous information from the sampled signal
is to have the sampler sample at least once every (27/w) second,
where we is the highest component frequency contained in the con-
tinuous signal. An extension of the sampling theorem is also given
that allows for fewer samples, but additional information is necessary
concerning the derivatives of the continuous signal at the sampling
instants.
For mathematical convenience the actual sampling process may

38
Chap. 2
THE SAMPLING PROCESS
be approximated by the operation of an ideal sampler, whose output
signal is a train of amplitude-modulated impulses. Based on this
simplification, four basic forms of the Laplace transform of the
sampled signal E*(s) are derived and the conditions of validity of
these expressions are discussed.
REFERENCES
Fogel, L. J., "A Note of the Sampling Theorem," I. R. E. Trans. on Informa-
tion Theory, 1, March 1955, pp. 47-48.
Jagerman, D. L., and Fogel, L. J., “Some General Aspects of the Sampling
Theorem," I. R. E. Trans. on Information Theory, 2, July 1956, pp. 139-146.
James, H. M., Nichols, N. B., and Phillips, R. S., Theory of Servomechanisms,
Chapter 5, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1947.
Linvill, W. K., "Sampled-Data Control Systems, Studied Through Comparison
of Sampling With Impulse Modulation," Trans. A. I. E. E., 70, 1951, pp.
1779-1799.
Shannon, C. E., Oliver, B. M., and Pierce, J. R., "The Philosophy of Pulse
Code Modulation," Proc. of the I. R. E., 36, No. 11, November 1948, pp.
1324-1331.
Truxal, J. G., Automatic Feedback Control System Synthesis, Chapter 9, New
York: McGraw-Hill Book Company. Inc., 1955.
Tsypkin, Y. Z., "Frequency Method of Analyzing Intermittent Regulating
Systems," Automet, i Telemekh. 14, No. 1, 1953, pp. 11-33.

3
RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED
SIGNALS
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Although the envelope of the sampled signal e*(t) corresponds
to the values of the continuous signal e(t) at the sampling instants,
the characteristics of the two functions in the frequency domain
have been shown to be quite different. In most feedback control
systems employing sampled-data, the high frequency sidebands in
e*(t) that resulted from the sampling operation must be removed
before the signal is applied to the continuous part of the system.
This step is absolutely necessary, since the continuous signal must
be reconstructed from the sampled-data; moreover, signals containing
high sidebands may cause excessive wear to the controlled elements.
Therefore, a component which may be considered as a data-recon-
struction device or a filtering device must be employed to remove
the sidebands from the sampled signal e* (t) before the signal is
applied to the controlled elements.
r(t)
The block diagram of a sampled-data feedback control system
e(t)e*(t), Digital
compensator
T
Sampler
D(s)
Data
reconstruction
Controlled c(t),
system
Fig. 3-1 Sampled-data feedback control system with data-recon-
struction device.
39

40
Chap. 3
RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS
with a data-reconstruction device is shown in Fig. 3-1. The sampled
signal is first processed or modified by a digital network D*(s); the
output of D*(s), which is in the form of a pulse train, is then
smoothed out by the data-reconstruction device before the signal
is applied to the components of the controlled process.
For the purpose of studying how data reconstruction may be
accomplished, let us assume that a sampler is sampling at a sampling
AIE*(jw)l
1/T
Filter characteristic
AAAA
2ως
-2ws
τως
-
- wc O wc
ως
Complementary
components
Primary
comp.
Complementary
components
Fig. 3-2 Reconstruction of continuous signal from sampled-data
using ideal low pass filter.
frequency of ws 2we rad/sec, where we is the highest frequency
component contained in the continuous signal being sampled. Figure
3-2 shows the amplitude spectrum of E*(s), from which it is clear
that in order to duplicate the continuous signal, the sampled signal
must be sent through an ideal low pass filter with an amplitude-
- wc
▲ Amplitude
wc
characteristic as shown in Fig. 3-
3. Unfortunately, an ideal filter
characteristic is physically unreali-
zable, since it can be shown that
its response begins before an input
is applied. However, even if we
could realize the ideal filter response,
we have learned in the last chapter
that perfect reproduction of the
continuous signal is still based on
the assumption that e(t) is band-limited. Therefore, for all practical
considerations, it is impossible to recover a continuous signal perfectly
from the sampled-data. The best we can do in data-reconstruction is
to try to approximate the original time function as closely as pos-
sible. Furthermore, as will be shown later in this chapter, a better
approximation of the original signal requires in general, a long time
delay that is undesirable in view of its adverse effect on system stabil-
Fig. 3-3 Amplitude characteristic of
ideal filter.
† J. L. Bower, and P. M. Schultheiss, Introduction to the Design of Servomecha-
nisms. (New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1958).

Sec. 3.2
RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS 41
ity. Consequently, the design of a data-reconstruction device usually
involves a compromise between the requirements of stability and the
desirability of a close approximation of the continuous signal.
3.2 DATA RECONSTRUCTION BY POLYNOMIAL
EXTRAPOLATION
The problem confronting us is that we have a sequence of
numbers e(nT) like that shown in Fig. 2-8c and the original
continuous signal e(t) shown in Fig. 2-8a must be reconstructed
from the information contained in this pulse sequence. Essentially,
this data-reconstruction process may be regarded as an extrapolation
process, since the continuous signal is to be constructed based on
information available only at past sampling instants. For instance,
the original function e(t) between two consecutive sampling instants.
nT and (n + 1)T is to be estimated based on the values of e(t) at
all preceding sampling instants of nT, (n - 1)T, (n-2)T, . . ., 0;
that is, e(nT), e(n − 1)T, e(n − 2)T, . . ., e(0). A well-known
method in generating this desired approximation is based on the
power series expansion of e(t) in the interval between sampling
instants nT and (n + 1)T; that is
―
| ex(t) = e(nT)| + e'(nT)(t − nT) +
where
zch
e' (nT) (t − nT)² + . . . (3-1)
2!
en(t) = e(t) for nT <t< (n + 1)T
(3-2)
[In Eq. (3-1), the primes indicate the derivatives of e(t) with respect.
to time.]
In order to evaluate the coefficients of the series given by Eq.
(3-1), the derivatives of the function e(t) must be obtained at the
sampling intants. Since the information concerning e(t) is available
only at the sampling instants, these derivatives must be estimated
from the impulse sequence. A simple expression involving only two
data pulses gives the estimate of the first derivative of e(t) at
t = nT as
-
e'(nT) = — [e(nT)
— [e(nT) — e(n − 1)T]
An approximated value of the second derivative is given by
1
T
-
-
e'(nT) = — [e'(nT) — e' (n − 1)T]
(3-3)
(3-4)
✦ J. R. Ragazzini, and L. H. Zadeh, "The Analysis of Sampled-Data Systems,"
Trans. A. I. E. E., 71, Part II, 1952, pp. 225-234.

42 RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS
Chap. 3
Substitution of Eq. (3-3) into Eq. (3-4) yields
1
T2
-
e"(nT) = —½ {e(nT) − 2e[(n − 1)T] + e[(n − 2)T]}
(3-5)
From these approximated values of e'(nT) and e"(nT), we see that
the higher the order of the derivative to be approximated, the larger
will be the number of delay pulses required. In fact, we can easily
show that the number of delay pulses required to approximate the
value of e(nT) is k + 1. Thus the extrapolating device described
above consists essentially of a series of time delays, and the number
of delays depends on the degree of accuracy of the estimate of the
time function e(t). The adverse effect of time delay on the stability
of feedback control systems is well known. Therefore, an attempt
to utilize the higher order derivatives of e(t) for the purpose of
more accurate extrapolation usually meets with serious difficulties
in maintaining system stability. Furthermore, a high-order extra-
polator also requires complex circuitry and results in a high cost in
construction. For these two reasons quite frequently only the first
term of Eq. (3-1) is used in practice. A device generating only e(nT)
of Eq. (3-1) is normally known as the zero-order extrapolator, since
the polynomial used is of the zeroth order. It is also commonly
referred to as the zero-order hold device because it holds the value
of the previous sample during a given sampling period. Similarly, a
device that implements the first two terms of Eq. (3-1) is called a
first-order hold, since the polynomial generated by this device is of
the first order. Details of the zero-order hold and higher order hold
devices are discussed in the following sections.
3.3 THE ZERO-ORDER HOLD
When only the first term of the power series given by Eq. (3-1)
is used as shown in the last section, the extrapolator is called a
zero-order hold. Then, Eq. (3-1) is simply
en(t) = e(nT)
(3-6)
The impulse response of a zero-order hold circuit is shown in Fig.
3-4. A simple diagram of a sampler with a capacitor hold is shown
in Fig. 3-5. The capacitor is assumed to be charged up to the voltage
e(nT) at the sampling instant t = nT instantaneously. (The actual
rate of charging the capacitor is of course determined by the capa-
citance and the actual source impedance.) As the sampling switch.
is opened during the sampling interval T, the capacitor holds the
charge until the next sampling interval. The input impedance of

Sec. 3.3
43
RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS
1
Unit impulse
(a)
T
(b)
Fig. 3-4 Impulse response of a zero-order hold. (a) Unit-impulse
input to zero-order hold circuit. (b) Impulse response of zero-
order hold.
T Sampler
To zero
impedance
source
Hold capacitor
Amplifier
Infinite
input
impedance
the amplifier shown in Fig. 3-5
is assumed to be infinite so that
there is no path for the capacitor
to discharge. The zero-order hold
circuit thus serves to stretch
the input pulses into a series of
rectangular waves of width T. In
practice, the amplifier does have
a large finite input impedance;
hence the actual waveform of the
hold circuit output is not a train of rectangular waves but rather,
a series of exponential decays with large time constant. The input
and output waveforms of a zero-order hold circuit (idealized) are
shown in Fig. 3-6a and Fig. 3-6b, respectively. Observe that the
hold circuit output is a step approximation to the actual signal, and
note also that increasing the sampling rate of the sampler tends to
improve the approximation of the continuous signal.
Fig. 3-5 Simple diagram of a sampler
and zero-order hold device.
(0)
e*(t)
Continuous signal e(t)
Sampled signal e*(†)
T 2T 3T 4T
5T
67-
h(t)
(b)
Output signal of zero-order hold
Desired continuous signal
2T 3T 4T 5T 6T
Fig. 3-6 Zero-order hold operation in the time domain. (a) In-
put signal e(t) and sampled signal e*(t). (b) Output waveform
of zero-order hold circuit and continuous signal e(t).

44 RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS
Chap. 3
In order to investigate the frequency response of the zero-order
hold, the transfer function of the hold circuit is derived from Fig.
3-4b.
1
Gho(s)
1
-ST
-
=
e
S
(3-7)
Setting s = jo in the last equation, we have
Gho(jw)
=
1
—
Equation (3-8) can be written as
Gho(jw)
=
or
=
- e-
jw
T
(3-8)
1
2e-(e -jwT
e-1½ joT)
2jw
(3-9)
W
T
e-jur
(3-10)
2 sin (T)e-wr
Gho(jw) = Tsin (@T)
Since T is the sampling period in seconds, and T = 2π/ws, where
w, is the sampling frequency in rad/sec, Eq. (3-10) becomes
Gro(jw)
=
2π sin π(w/w)
Ws (w/ws)
-jx(w/w)
(3-11)
The gain and phase characteristics of the zero-order hold are given
by the following equations:
|Gno(jw)|
2π
Ws
Gno(jw)
-π
ω
3ως
4ws
2ως
ως
Δως
2ως
3ως
ως
Fig. 3-7 Gain and phase characteristics of a zero-order hold.

Sec. 3.3
45
RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS
:(w/ws)
@s 7(w/ws)
πω
|
| Gro(jw) |
=
2π|sin πω ως
and
sin (w/w)
Gro(jw) =-π(w/ws)
π
[sin (w/w)
(3-12)
(3-13)
The frequency response (amplitude and phase) of the zero-order
hold is shown in Fig. 3-7. This figure shows that the zero-order
hold behaves essentially as a low-pass filter. However, when compared
with the ideal filter characteristics of Fig. 3-3, the amplitude response
of the zero-order hold is zero at wws, instead of cutting off sharply
at w./2. In fact, at w = ws/2, the magnitude of Gho(jw) is equal to
0.636.
We have seen from Fig. 3-6b that the effectiveness of the zero-
order hold as an extrapolating device depends also on the sampling
frequency w; this relationship can easily be shown from the fre-
quency response curves. Figure 3-8a shows the amplitude spectrum
of the sampler output and the frequency response of the zero-order
hold when the sampling frequency is equal to the theoretical minimum
(ws = 2wc). A rough sketch of the frequency response of the output
signal of the hold circuit is given in Fig. 3-8b. Observe from Fig.
|Gno(jw)|
|E* (jw)|
ως
2
ய
2ως
3ως
4Ws
ως
(a)
A
ω
2ως
3Ws
4ws
wc
ως
(b)
-
2we. (b) Frequency
Fig. 3-8 (a) Frequency response of zero-order hold and ampli-
tude spectrum of sampler output when w
response of the output signal of a zero-order hold when w
2wc.
3-8b that the hold circuit output contains not only the primary
component, but also a considerable number of high frequency com-
ponents. Figure 3-9b indicates that the filtering property of the

46 RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS
Chap. 3
wc
|Gno (jw)|
|E* (jw)l
ως
(a)
Ws
Wc
ω
2ως
2ως
(b)
Fig. 3-9 (a) Frequency response of zero-order hold and ampli-
tude spectrum of sampler output when w, >2wc. (b) Frequency
response of the output signal of a zero-order hold when w、 > 2we.
zero-order hold is actually improved by increasing the sampling
frequency.
3.4 THE FIRST-ORDER HOLD
If the first two terms of the power series given by Eq. (3-1) are
used to extrapolate the time function e(t) between two successive
sampling instants nT and (n + 1)T, the device is called a first-order
hold. Equation (3-1) may be written as follows when its first two
terms are taken.
where
en(t) = e(nT) + e'(nT)(t − nT)
e'(nT)
e(nT) - e(n − 1)T
=
T
(3-14)
(3-15)
Hence substituting Eq. (3-15) into Eq. (3-14) yields
en(t) = e(nT) +
e(nT)
-
e(n - 1)T
T
(t − nT)
(3-16)
Equation (3-16) shows that the output of the first-order hold between
two consecutive sampling instants nT and (n + 1)T is a ramp
function. The slope of the ramp function is equal to the difference
in amplitudes of e(t) at t = nT and t = (n - 1)T. The impulse
response of the first-order hold is shown in Fig. 3-10. The impulse

Sec. 3.4
47
RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS
Unit impulse
2
(a)
-
T
127
(b)
1
Fig. 3-10 Impulse response of a first-order hold. (a) Unit-impulse
input to first-order hold. (b) Impulse response.
response of the first-order hold is derived from Eq. (3-16) by applying
an impulse of unit strength at t=0 as input. When n = 0, Eq.
(3-16) reads
e。(t)
= e(0) + e(0) — e( − T) t
--
T
(3-17)
For a unit-impulse input, e(0) = 1, and e(T) = 0. The impulse
response for 0 <t<T is
G(t) = eo(t) = 1 +
+ T
(3-18)
The impulse response for T<t < 2T is obtained by setting n equal
to unity in Eq. (3-16).
e₁(t)
= e(T) + e(T) = e(0)
-
-
(t − T)
Since e(0) 1 and e(T)
=
T
(3-19)
1 and e(T) = 0, the impulse response of the first-order
hold for T<t< 2T is
gm(t)
= e₁(t) = 1
1-1
T
(3-20)
....
The impulse response for all other sampling intervals is zero, since
e(2T), e(3T), . . etc., are all equal to zero. The transfer function
of the first-order hold is derived directly from the impulse response
illustrated in Fig. 3-10. Therefore,
2
е
Ga(s) = 1 + 7's (1-e)
==
Ts
T
S
(3-21)
Let us investigate how the time function of Fig. 3-6a is reproduced
by the first-order extrapolation (Fig. 3-11). For the same sampling
rate used in the case of Fig. 3-6, the approximated waveform shown
in Fig. 3-11 does not indicate any advantage of the first-order hold
over the zero-order device. As a matter of fact, the zero-order hold

48
Chap. 3
RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS
Output signal of first-order hold
Desirable continuous signal e(t)
T
27
3T 4T 5T
6T
Fig. 3-11 Reconstruction of a continuous signal by means of a
first-order hold.
Output signal of first-order hold
Continuous signal to be reconstructed
O
T 3T 5T 7T 9T...
4T 6T 87
2T
Fig. 3-12 Reconstruction of a continuous signal from sampled-
data by means of a first-order hold. The sampling frequency is
higher than that used in Fig. 3-11.
actually gives better approximations in certain sampling intervals.
However, Fig. 3-12 shows that, if the sampling rate is increased,
the first-order hold does give a better approximation. One should
not be concerned with the large error in the output of the first-order
hold between sampling instants T and 0; this is purely because we
assume that the value of e(t) is zero for negative time and that it
has a jump at t=0.
The frequency response of the first-order hold is obtained by
substituting s = jo in the transfer function in Eq. (3-21). We have
jw
Gm ( j∞) = 1 + jœT (1 —;
jw
jw T\ 2
(3-22)
From the last equation the gain and phase characteristics of the
first-order hold are obtained as
w w₁)²
sin πω
πω ως
| G₁(jw) | =
-
2π
Ws
4πω
1 +
2
ως
2πω
'G₁(jw) = tan
-1
(270)
@s
Ws
(3-23)
(3-24)

Sec. 3.5
RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS 49
Gnt(jw)
2п
ως
O
Gri(jw)
ως
2ως
3ως
Phase shift of zero-order hold
Phase shift of first-order hold
Δως
3
Fig. 3-13 Gain and phase characteristics of a first-order hold.
The frequency response curves for the first-order hold are sketched
in Fig. 3-13. From the gain characteristic we see that the first-order
hold cuts off at w = ws, just as in the case of the zero-order hold
but at a sharper rate. The fact that the amplitude curve peaks up
between zero frequency and w, shows that higher ripple may be
contained in the output if the sampling frequency is low. In Fig.
3-13 the phase shift of the first-order hold is compared with that
of the zero-order hold. Note that at low frequencies, the phase lag
produced by the zero-order device exceeds that of the first-order
hold but, as the frequency becomes higher, the opposite is true.
However, in feedback control systems, the high frequency charac-
teristics of the open-loop transfer function normally control the
system stability; therefore, application of the first-order hold does.
complicate the problem of closed-loop systems stability. Consequently,
although the first-order hold in general does a better job in signal
recovery than the zero-order hold, the fact that it is quite complex
to construct and its adverse effect on system stability have made
it seldom practical.
3.5 THE FRACTIONAL-ORDER HOLD
From the discussions given in the last two sections, we see that
the amplitude characteristic of a zero-order hold drops off rapidly at
low frequencies and the amplitude characteristic of a first-order
hold exhibits an overshoot before cutting off sharply at w = ws. An
amplitude characteristic which falls between the zero-order and the

50
Chap. 3
RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS
first-order characteristics would come close to approximating the
ideal filter response. Such a filter characteristic may be realized by
use of a so called fractional-order holdt and may be regarded as
an extension or modification of the first-order hold. The output
signal of a zero-order hold has a zero slope between two consecutive
sampling instants, whereas that of a first-order hold has a constant
slope determined by the difference in values of the two preceding
samples. For a fractional-order hold the output signal between two
consecutive sampling instants has a slope which is equal to k times
Unit impulse
Gnk(1)
First-order hold
2-
1
Zero-order hold
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3-14 Impulse response of a fractional-order hold. (a) Unit
impulse input to fractional-order hold. (b) Impulse response.
the difference in values of the two preceding samples, where k is a
number between zero and unity. The impulse response of a fractional-
order hold is shown in Fig. 3-14. The impulse response can be
represented by a series of step and ramp functions as follows:
k
8nk(t) = (1 + — t)u(t) − (1 + k)u(t
(1 + k)u(t − T) − 2k (t
T) − 2 (t − T)u(t − T)
+ ku(t - 2T)+ (t 2T)u(t2T)
k
T
T
(3-25)
Taking the Laplace transform of the last equation term by term
yields
Ghk(s)
1
k
-
+
S Ts2
1 + k
S
-ST
2k
-ST
e
Ts2
k
+
-28T
S
T's2
e
k
-28T
+
e
Equation (3-26) may be rearranged to read
k
(1 e-Ts)
Ghk(s) (1 ke-Ts)
-
(3-26)
=
+ (1 - e-ST) 2
T's2
(3-27)
S
† J. R. Ragazzini, and G. F. Franklin, Sampled-Data Control Systems, (New York:
McGraw Hill Book Company, Inc., 1958), pp. 40-42; also, E. I. Jury, (Sampled-Data
Control Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 1958), pp. 52-53.

Sec. 3.6
RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS 51
Gnk(jw)
2π
ως
k =1
k=0.5
-k=0.3
k=0.2
k=0
Gnk (jw)
w
Ws
2ως
k=0
k=0.2
k=0.3
k=1
k=0.5
Fig. 3-15 Gain and phase characteristics of a fractional-order
hold device.
Therefore, the transfer function of a fractional-order hold is
Gnk(s) = (1 − ke¯™)Gno(s) + [Gro(s) ]²
or
(3-28)
k
-
Ghk(s) = (1 ke¯™)Gno(s) +
Gn(s)
(3-29)
Ts + 1
where Gho(s) and Gh(s) are the transfer functions of the zero-order
hold and the first-order hold, respectively. From the three preceding
equations, we clearly see that when k = 0, G(s) = Gho(s); the device
is identical to a zero-order hold. On the other hand, when k = 1,
Ghk(s) is identical to the transfer function of the first-order hold.
The frequency response in magnitude and phase of G(jw) is
plotted in Fig. 3-15 for five different values of k. It is observed from
this plot that a flat response is obtained when k is approximately
0.3. In general, an optimum value of k is determined based on the
frequency distribution of the input signal. A particular value of k
should be selected that will result in extrapolations having the least
error for this known range of frequencies.
3.6 THE EXPONENTIAL HOLD
Since the extrapolation of the sampled signal normally calls for
the use of a low-pass filter, theoretically, at least, there is no reason
why an ordinary low-pass passive network cannot be used. In fact,

52
Chap. 3
RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS
if the first two terms of the power series expansion of e" are taken,
the transfer function of the zero-order hold reads.
Gra(8)=1-1(1-1)-(1-1+7)=1+T₁
-T'S
Gho(s)
e
S
Τ
Ts
(3-30)
which is the transfer function of the R-C low-pass network shown
in Fig. 3-16. Since Eq. (3-30) represents a decaying exponental time
ww
R
Fig. 3-16 R-C passive network as hold
device.
function in the time domain, this
type of extrapolator is often
described as the exponential hold.
A comparison of the frequency
response of the zero-order and the
exponential holds is made in Fig.
3-17. The reconstruction of the continuous signal e(t) of Fig. 3-6a
by means of the exponential hold is shown in Fig. 3-18.
Gno(jw)|
2π
Gain characteristic of exponential hold
Ws
20.707
Gain characteristic of zero-order hold
Gno(jw)
2ως
3ως
4ws
WS
Phase characteristic of
exponential hold
Phase of zero-order
hold
Fig. 3-17 Comparison of gain and phase characteristics of zero-
order hold and exponential hold.
Desired continous signal e(t)
Output signal of exponential hold
T
2T 3T 4T 5T
6T
Fig. 3-18 Reconstruction of e(t) by an exponential hold.
If the first three terms of the power series expansion of er are
used, we have
Go(s) T
=
1 + (Ts/2)
1+ Ts+ (Ts2/2)
(3-31)
This approximation of the zero-order hold may be realized by the
R-L-C network shown in Fig. 3-19.

Sec. 3.6
53
RECONSTRUCTION OF SAMPLED SIGNALS
Although better approximations
of the zero-order hold by use of
passive networks can be obtained
if es is approximated by higher
order polynomials, the physical
implementations of the passive
networks apparently grow more
complex as the orders of the poly-
nomials approximations are in-
creased. Furthermore, the presence
ww
R₁
ww
R2
R3
C
L
Fig. 3-19 R-L-C passive network as
hold device.
of complex poles and zeros for higher order approximations forces
the use of inductive as well as capacitive and resistive elements,
thus making the components rather bulky.
REFERENCES
Barker, R. H., "The Reconstruction of Sampled-data," Proc. Conference on
Data Processing and Automatic Computing Machines, Salisbury, Australia,
June 1957.
Porter, A., and Stoneman, F., "A New Approach to the Design of Pulse
Monitored Servo Systems," J. I. E. E., London, 97, Part II, 1950, pp. 597-
610.
Ragazzini, J. R., and Zadeh, L. H., "The Analysis of Sampled-Data Systems,"
Trans. A. I. E. E., 71, Part II, 1952, pp. 225–234.
Schneider, G., “On the Development of Linear Difference Equation Units,"
Proc. of the International Federation of Automatic Control, Moscow, 1960, pp.
158-164.
Tsypkin, Y. Z., "Sampled-data Systems With Extrapolating Devices," Avtomat.
Telemekh, 19, No. 5, 1958, pp. 389-400.

4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
4.1 DEFINITION OF THE Z-TRANSFORM
In Chapter 2 the Laplace transform of a sampled time function
e* (t) is shown to be
00
L[e*(t)] = E*(s) = Σ e(nT)e="T
--
n = 0
(4-1)
where e(nT) denotes the values of the continuous function e(t) at
the sampling instants. However, the expression of E*(s) normally
contains the factor e ", which inevitably makes E*(s) a nonalgebraic
equation. We know that when nonalgebraic equations are used
difficulties in taking the inverse Laplace transform and partial fraction
expansions will arise. Therefore, the introduction of a change in
variable by setting
or
z = e
s =
= ln x
T
(4-2)
(4-3)
is both desirable and convenient where s is the Laplace operator, T
is the sampling period, and z is a complex variable defined by a
complex z-plane. The variable z may be called the z-transform
operator. When this substitution is made in Eq. (4-1), we have
00
E* (s = — ln x ) = E(x) = Σ e(nT) x¯"
n = 0
(4-4)
Therefore, the Laplace transform of the sampled function e*(t), E*(s),
54

Sec. 4.1
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 55
is now a function of z and is referred to as the z-transform of e(t).
Hence
E(z) = z-transform of e(t) = Z[e(t)]
where the symbol
(4-5)
is used to denote "the z-transform of." Also
E(z) = Laplace transform of e* (t) \s = (1/7) Inz
= E*(s) = (1/T) in?
| s In
(4-6)
Evidently, the z-transform of the time function e(t) is still the same
as the Laplace transform of e*(t), though disguised by the change
in variable from s to z. Since the z-transform of e(t) is derived from
the Laplace transform of e*(t) with a change in variable, we can
say in general that, in view of the relationship between E*(s) and
E(s) given by Eq. (2-68), any continuous function that possesses a
Laplace transform also has a z-transform.
In a similar manner, the expression for E*(s) in Eq. (2-55), when
z-transformed, reads
E(x) =
n = 1
N(En)
D'(n) 1
1
enz-1
(4-7)
indicating that if E(z) has a finite number of simple poles, the z-
transform of e(t) is a rational function in z. Furthermore, the degree
of the denominator of E(z) in z¹ is equal to the degree of the
denominator of E(z) in s.
One of the disadvantages of the z-transform is that it carries in-
formation about the corresponding time function only at the sampling
instants; that is, E(z) defines e*(t) only. If the sampling frequency
is high (at least twice as high as the highest signal frequency), the
continuous signal e(t), if it is band-limited, may be recovered from
e*(t) by means of an ideal filter. Then the z-transform E(2) carries
virtually all the information contained in the Laplace transform E(s).
However, if nothing is known about the characteristics of e(t), the
inverse z-transformation is usually not unique, since the discrete
time function e* (t), obtained from E(z), may represent any continu-
ous function e(t) that has the same values as e*(t) at the sampling
instants. In Fig. 4-1 two entirely different time functions with the
Le₁(t)
ex(t)
1
2T 4T 6T¦
T 3T 5T
7T
ez(1)
e (1)
2T
4T 6T
T 3T 5T 77
Fig. 4-1 Two different time functions that have the same
transforms.
Z-

56
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
same z-transform are illustrated. The only way to distinguish between
these two functions, from the z-transform point of view, is to define
the waveforms of the signals between sampling instants. In the past,
several methods have been developed for the evaluation of signals
between sampling instants. Among these methods the submultiple
sampling method and the modified z-transform methods are the most
common. These methods are discussed in detail in later sections of
this chapter. Regardless of the fact that the inverse z-transform is
not unique and of the other limitations of the z-transform method
to be brought out later, the modern design and analysis of sampled-
data systems still rely heavily on the z-transform technique because
of its simplicity and unique manner of application.
4.2 EVALUATION OF Z-TRANSFORMS
In general, given a time function e(t), the z-transform of e(t),
E(z), may be obtained by using the following steps:
(1) E*(s), the Laplace transform of e*(t) is obtained by use of
either Eq. (2-46) or Eq. (2-55).
4
(2) E(z) is obtained by substituting z = es in E*(s).
Example 4-1
Evaluate the z-transform of a unit impulse function (t). In this case
assume that when an impulse is sent through an ideal sampler, the output of
the sampler is still an impulse of identical strength. Thus
The Laplace transform of e*(t) is thus
Hence
Example 4-2
e* (t) = e(t) = d(t)
E*(s) = 1
E(z) = E*(s) |s = (1/7 ) in 2
= 1
(4-8)
(4-9)
(4-10)
Evaluate the z-transform of a unit-impulse train of period T.
00
-
e(t) = 8r(t) = Σ d(t − nT)
n = 0
(4-11)
E. I. Jury, Sampled-Data Control Systems (New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1958), pp. 64-72.
W. K. Linvill and R. W. Sittler, "Extension of Conventional Techniques to the
Design of Sampled-data Systems," I. R. E. Convention Records, Part I, 1953, pp. 99–104.
§ R. H. Barker, "The Pulse Transfer Function and its Application to Sampling Servo
Systems," Proc. I. E. E., London, 99, Part 4, 1952, pp. 302-317.
E. I. Jury, "Synthesis and Critical Study of Sampled-Data Control Systems," Trans.
A. I. E. E., 75, Part 2, 1956, pp. 141-151.

Sec. 4.2
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 57
Again, based on the assumption made in Example 4-1, e*(t) is identical to
e(t). Therefore,
E*(s) = Σ
e-nts
(4-12)
n = 0
and the z-transform of the unit-impulse train is
00
E(≈) = Σz-"
2་”
(4-13)
n = 0
E(z) can be written in closed form as
z
-
E(z) = = = 1 121
(4-14)
Example 4-3
Evaluate the z-transform of a unit-step function u(t). When the step
function is sampled by an ideal sampler, the output is a unit-impulse train
described by Eq. (4-11). Thus the z-transform of a unit-step function is also
given by Eq. (4-14). This is because the inverse z-transformation is not unique.
The inverse z-transform of E(z) in Eq. (4-14) can be interpreted as a unit-
step function, a unit-impulse train of period T, or any continuous time function
that has a value of unity at t = nT (n = 0, 1, 2, . . .). Another difficulty in
the z-transformation is that the ideal sampler cannot distinguish among a train
e(t)
e(n)
e(t)
2T 4T 6T
T 3T 5T
Unit-impulse train
e
T
T
Ideal sampler
e*(t)
2T 4T 6T
3T 5T
Unit-impulse train
e
t
T
Ideal sampler
2T 4T 6T
3T 5T
Unit-impulse train
Unit-step function
Fig. 4-2 The sampling of a unit-impulse train and a unit-step
function by an ideal sampler. The output signals of the samplers
are identical in both cases.
of impulses, each impulse with unit area, and a unit-step function. The sampling
of the impulse train and the unit-step function by an ideal sampler is shown
in Fig. 4-2. However, this difficulty does not occur in practice, since a true
impulse is not found in physical systems.
Example 4-4
In this example the z-transform of the exponential function e(t) = e¯at is

58
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
determined by use of Eq. (2-46). The values of e(t) at the sampling
instants are denoted by e(nT) = e-anr. Hence the Laplace transform of the
sampled signal e*(t) is
E*(s)
=
00
Σ
n = 0
-ant e-n =
-nTs
1+e-are-TS + e-2aTe-2Ts +
...
(4-15)
which can be written in a closed form as
E*(s) =
1
1- e-(s+a)T | e-T |<le-ar |
Substituting z = es into E*(s), the z-transform of e(t) is given by
(4-16)
1
E(z)
2
=
-
1 e-at-1
2- e-ar
12<e-ar
Example 4-5
(4-17)
In this example the z-transform of a sine function e(t) = sin ot is deter-
mined by use of Eq. (2-55). In Eq. (2-55),
and
W
E(§) = L[e(t)]
=
s² + @²
N(§) = @
D'(E) = 25
(4-18)
(4-19)
(4-20)
where N(§) represents the numerator and D(§) represents the denominator
of E(§). Since E(s) has two finite poles, one at s =
the Laplace transform of the sampled function e*(t) is
2
1
E*(s) = ((n) 1 - e-ra-t»)
=
77=1
@
D'(En)
[
2jw1
ய
=
2jø 1
1
- e-T(8-jw)
-
1
-e
- jo and one at s = - jw,
1
-T(s + jw)
T
e-Ts (-e-tw" + etor)
е
Jు T
-2TS
(4-21)
-e-Ts (e + e-jw T ) + e −2Ts
Equation (4-21) can be simplified to read
e-Ts sin @T
E*(s) =
-2T's
e
2e
-T'S
cos @ T + 1
(4-22)
Hence the z-transform of e(t) is
E(z) =
-
z sin @ T
z-1 sin @T
2z¹ cos @ T + 1 22-22 cos @ T + 1
(4-23)
In the preceding examples the z-transforms of the time functions
e(t) are evaluated with the time functions as the starting point, and
then the defining steps of the z-transformation are followed through.
Actually, the intermediate step of finding the Laplace transform
E*(s) can be eliminated by writing the z-transform directly from
either Eq. (4-4) or Eq. (4-7). In this manner the z-transforms for

Sec. 4.3
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 59
other Laplace transformable functions can be determined. Thus, just
as in working with the Laplace transforms of time functions, a table
can be assembled for the z-transforms associated with commonly used
time functions. A short table of z-transforms is given in Table 4-1,
and a more extensive one is presented in Appendix A.
In using the z-transform table, remember that the inverse z-trans-
form is not unique. One may use the table only to find the z-transform
of a given time function, but given a z-transform E(z), there is no
unique solution for e(t).
4.3 MAPPING OF THE S-PLANE INTO THE Z-PLANE
The study of the mapping of the s-plane into the z-plane by the
z-transformation z = es is necessarily important. The design and
analysis of continuous-data control systems often rely on the pole-
zero configurations of systems transfer functions in the s-plane.
Similarly, the poles and zeros of the z-transform of a system transfer
function may conceivably determine the sampled response of the
system. Therefore, in this section some of the important contours
frequently used in the s-plane, such as the constant damping ratio
jw
s-plane
∞-
jws
The primary
strip
-글 ​jus
(a)
बंड
Caris
4 Im z
z-plane
z= e
s-jw
1
1
Re z
(b)
Fig. 4-3 Mapping of the primary strip in the left half of the s-
plane into the z-plane by the z-transformation.
T-

60
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
line, the constant frequency line, or the imaginary axis will be mapped
into the z-plane by the transformation z = e".
The s-plane is first divided into an infinite number of periodic
strips as shown in Fig. 2-18. The primary strip extends from w =
TABLE 4-1
TABLE OF Z TRANSFORMS
Time function
Laplace transform
Unit-impulse (t)
1
Unit step u(t)
dr(t) = Σ 8(t − nT)
n = 0
1
14
S
1
2
14
n
1
57+1
Ts
e-at
te-at
1 - e-al
sin wt
1
s+ a
1
(s + a) 2
a
s(s + a)
ω
+ w
e-at sin wt
(sa)
ω
+ wi
z-transform
1
2 2 1
Z
z-
Tz
(≈ − 1)²
T²z (z+1)
2(x-1)3
n
lim (-1)" " (~~~
n
an
2
e-ar
2
(2
2
2
-e-ar
Tze-ar
(z - e-ar)²
z(1 - e-ar)
--
ze
1)(z-e-ar
z sin w T
T)
2z cos w T +1
ar sin w T
22 - 2ze-ar cos w Te
--
cos @ T)
2x cos w T +1
2a T
COS wt
e-at cos wt
--
@s
S
2(2 -
+ wa
22
s+ a
22
(s + a)² + w²
22
.
ze
-ar cos w
wT
2ze-ar cos w T + e-
2a T
-ws/2 to +ws/2; and the other complementary strips extend from
-ws 2 to 3 ws/2, -3ws/2 to -5ws/2, . . ., for negative frequencies,
and from ws/2 to 3ws/2, 3ws/2 to 5ws/2, . . ., for positive frequencies.
If we consider only the primary strip shown in Fig. 4-3a, the path
described by (1)-(2)-(3)-(4)-(5)-(1) in the left half of the s-plane
is mapped into a unit circle centered at the origin in the z-plane
(Fig. 4-3b) by the transformation z = e". Similarly, since

Sec. 4.3
61
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
e(s+jn w,) T
= eT's e²x jn = e
2x
T's
= 2
(4-24)
all the other left half s-plane complementary_strips are also mapped
into the same unit circle in the z-plane. In other words, all points
in the left half of the s-plane are mapped into the region inside the
unit circle in the z-plane. The points in the right half of the s-plane
are thus mapped into the region outside the unit circle in the z-plane..
The loci of constant damping factor, constant frequency, and
constant damping ratio in the z-plane for sampled-data systems are
given in the following:
1. The Constant Damping Loci
For a constant damping factor σ, in the s-plane, the corresponding
z-plane locus is a circle of radius z = e centered at the origin in
the z-plane as shown in Fig. 4-4.
jw
s-plane
Im z
Unit
circle
z-plane
-02
O
0₁
(a)
Constant
damping loci
eat
(b)
Re z
5+
е
Z
ST
2
1
1
Fig. 4-4 Constant damping loci in the s-plane and the z-plane.
2. The Constant Frequency Loci
For any constant frequency w₁ in the s-plane, the corresponding
z-plane locus is a straight line emanating from the origin at an angle
of T rad; the angle is measured from the positive real axis
(Fig. 4-5).
=
3. The Constant Damping Ratio Loci
For a constant damping ratio , the constant & line in the s-plane
is shown in Fig. 4-6a; the line is described by the equation,
S=
w tan ẞ + jo
(4-25)

62
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
jw
s-plane
Im z
z-plane
"
jws
jwz
jw₁
Re z
Ο
-jw₁
-шут
Hence
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4-5 Constant frequency loci in the s-plane and the z-plane.
z = ets = e
(-w tan B+ jw)T
Equation (4-26) can be written
where
2=e
-2x w tan B/W, 277 w/ws
B
= sing
= constant
(4-26)
(4-27)
(4-28)
For a given the constant path described by Eq. (4-27) is a
logarithmic spiral in the z-plane except for 8 = 0° and 90°. The region
shown shaded in Fig. 4-6a corresponds to the interior of the shaded
region of Fig. 4-6b. In Fig. 4-7, the constant paths for B = 30
degrees are shown in both the s-plane and the z-plane. Each one-
half revolution of the logarithmic spiral corresponds to the passage

- ∞
s-plane
|jw
- ½jws
Im z
z-plane
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4-6 Constant damping ratio loci in the s-plane and the z-
plane.
Re z
1

Sec. 4.4
63
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
jw
B=30°
s-plane
-3jws
+2jws
Fiws
Im z
z-plane
༢༤༤,༥.
114
ws
fws
Re z
Ws
w=0/1
314
3
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4-7 Constant damping ratio loci for B
cent) in the s-plane and the z-plane.
=
30° (50 per-
of the -path in the s-plane through a change of w, along the
imaginary axis.
4.4 THE INVERSE Z-TRANSFORMATION
Just as in the method of Laplace transformation, time domain
response must often be obtained from the z-transform expressions.
Since the inverse z-transformation is not unique, we must remember
that the inversion from z to time domain referred to here is the
determination of e(t) or the sampled values of e(t) at the sampling
instants enT), but not e(t), from the z-transform E(z).
In general, the inverse z-transformation can be effected by one of
the following methods:
(1) The Partial Fraction Method. The z-transform E(z) is manip-
ulated into a sum of functions by partial fraction expansion, and
the z-transform table is used to find the corresponding time functions
of the expanded terms. Note that, although the z-transform tables
in this book and elsewhere have the time functions tabulated in the
form of continuous functions e(t), the inverse transform of E(z) is
not necessarily equal to e(t) (and most likely it is not). The inverse
z-transform of E(z) is simply a time function that has the same
values as the corresponding e(t) at the sampling instants of t = nT
(n = 0, 1, 2, . . .).
(2) The Power Series Method. The z-transform E(z) is expanded
into a power series in powers of 21. The coefficient of the term 2-"
corresponds to the value of the time function e(t) at the n-th sam-
pling instant.


64
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
(3) The Inversion Formula Method. The time function e*(t) may
be obtained from E(z) by the real inversion integral. The values of
e(t) at the sampling instants are determined by use of the following
formula:
1
e(nT)
=
2πj §. E(2) 2^~¹ dz
(4-29)
where I is a circle of radius z = ecr centered at the origin of the
z-plane, and c is of such a value that all the poles of E(z) are
enclosed by the circle.
The proofs and the illustrations of the above three methods are
given in the following:
1. The Partial Fraction Method
Recall that in the analysis of continuous signals, the partial frac-
tion expansion of a given Laplace transform E(s) may be written as
E(s)
=
+
A
B
C
+
s+ a s+b s+c
+
(4-30)
and the inverse Laplace transform of E(s) yields the time function
e(t)
=
Ae at Bebt + Ce-ct + ...
(4-31)
In the case of the z-transformation, it would seem at a first glance
that E(z) should also be expanded into a form similar to that of Eq.
(4-30); that is,
E(x) =
A
B
+
+
C
z + a 2+b z + c
+
4-32)
However, inverse z-transform for each term of the right-hand side
of Eq. (4-32) is not found in the z-transform table. Furthermore, the
z-transform of the exponential term Ae-at is Az/(z - e-ar). Therefore,
if each term of the partial fraction expansion has the form of
z/(z - e-ar), e*(t) can be expressed as the sum of exponential func-
tions. For this reason, it is more desirable to expand the function
E(z)/z and then to multiply each of the expanded terms by z.
Example 4-6
Given the z-transform
E(z) =
=
-
(1 - e-ar)≈
(≈ − 1)(≈ — e -ат
(4-33)
where a is a constant and T is the sampling time in seconds, evaluate the
inverse z-transform e*(t). The partial fraction expansion of E(z)/z_is
E()
22
=
1
༤
1 x-
1
ar
(4-34)

Sec. 4.4
65
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
Hence
Z
E(z) =
-
2
-
2
ат
(4-35)
From the z-transform table (Table 4-1) the inverse z-transform of E(z) is
found to be a time function whose values at the sampling instants are described
by
e(nT) = 1 − e-anr
-
The sampled function is given by
(4-36)
00
e*(t) = Σ (1 − e−anr )8(t − nT) \
n=0
(4-37)
Nothing about the behavior of e(t) in between the sampling instants can be
concluded from the z-transform E(z), or the sampled time function e*(t).
2. The Power Series Method
In this method E(z) is expanded into a power series in powers
of 2-1 by means of long division. E(z) is first written into the form of
E(z)
=
·
m-1
am2m+am-12' +
+ a₁z + ao
bnz+bn-12-¹ + . . . + b₁z + bo
(4-38)
Dividing the numerator by the denominator by long division yields
E(x)
=
Azm-nBzm-n-¹ +
(4-39)
For a physically realizable system, n>m. Comparing Eq. (4-39)
with Eq. (4-4), we clearly see that the coefficients A, B, . . . in Eq.
(4-39) correspond to the respective values of e(nT) in Eq. (4-4).
Thus
Example 4-7
A = e|(mn) |T, B = e | (m − n − 1)|T, ...
Determine the inverse z-transform of Eq. (4-33) by means of the power
series expansion method. Equation (4-33) is written
E(z)
-
22
-
Dividing the denominator into the
E(2):
=
-1
(1
-
e-ar) z
(1 + ear)z + e-ar
2
(1 − e−ar)≈¯¹ + (1 − e−2α7) ≈¯ + (1
The inverse z-transform of E(z)
or
is
(4-40)
numerator yields
2aT
-
e-зar) z +
3
(4-41)
(4-42)
(4-43)
e* (t) = (1 ear)&(t − T) + (1 - e-2ar) (t − 2T) + . . .
-
-
-
e* (t) = Σ (1 − e−anr) 8(t − nT)
n=0
−
This result is identical to that in Eq. (4-37) obtained by the partial fraction
expansion method.

66 THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
Chap. 4
3. The Inversion Formula Method
It is of interest to compare the defining equations of the Laplace
transform and the z-transform. Given e(t) as a continuous function
of time that is Laplace transformable, the Laplace transform and the
z-transform of e(t) are respectively,
and
E(s) = L[e(t)] = √ e(t) e¯" dt
00
E(x) = Z[e(t)] = Σ e(nT)z¯”
n=0
(4-44)
(4-45)
The similarity between the two equations is striking. Actually, if
the sampling frequency approaches infinity, E(z) reverts to E(s).
In a similar manner, the inverse transforms in the s and the z
domains may be written as
and
1
e(t)
=
2nj
1
C-joo
Sotto E(s) e' ds
e(nT)
=
2πj
§, E(x) x" - ¹ dz
1
(4-46)
(4-47)
respectively; in Eq. (4-46), the constant c denotes the abscissa of
convergence of the Laplace transform, and c is so chosen that it is
greater than the real parts of all the singularities of the integrand
E(s)els; in Eq. (4-47), I is a closed path (a circle) in the z-plane
which encloses all the singularities of E(z)z"-¹. The proof of the
inversion formula of the z-transforms is given as follows:
Since e(nT) represents the values of e(t) at the sampling instants,
we substitute t = nT in Eq. (4-46); therefore,
e(nT)
=
1
SE(s) en ds
2πj Jc-j∞
(4-48)
where the path of integration is as shown in Fig. 4-3a. This path
is seen to pass through the periodic strips of the s-plane vertically,
and thus the integration of Eq. (4-48) may be broken up into a sum
of integrals; each integral is performed within one of the periodic
strips. Equation (4-48) can now be written
ws
00
e(nT)
1
rc+ [n+(1/2)] jw,
=
ΣE(s)ent ds
2nj Je+ [n- (1/2)] jw,
N=-∞
(4-49)
where w₁ = 2π/T. Replacing s by s+jnws, where n is an integer,
Eq. (4-49) becomes
0
1
(c+ (jw₁/2)
e(nT) =
2nj
Σ + (3) E(s + jnw.)e^T(s+j«,) d(s + jnw;)
c-(jw,/2)
(4-50)

Sec. 4.4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 67
or
00
1
e(nT) Ž + (2) E(s + jnw.)e^r ds
=
2πj
n=100
c-(jw,/2)
Interchanging the summation and integration signs, we have
1 (c+(jw,/2)
e(nT)
=
∞
Sec+ (hu) Ž E(s + jnw₁)e™™ ds
2πj Jc-(jw/2)
N=1∞
Since E*(s) = = Σ E(s + jnw.), Eq. (4-52) reads
T
n=-∞
(4-51)
(4-52)
e(nT)
T (c+(jw,/2)
=
2πj √e-tw) E* (s) er ds
c-(jw,/2)
(4-53)
When z = e" is substituted into the last equation, for the interval
-∞, <w<+ 1ws,
E*(s) |= (1/T) in 2 = E(z)
(4-54)
ents = 2"
(4-55)
ds=e" dz = z dz
12-1
(4-56)
Equation (4-53) now becomes
T
e(nT)
=
2πj
§, E(x) x" — x¯¹ dz
(4-57)
or
´e(nT)
1
=
2πj §, E(2) 2″-¹ dz
n-1
(4-58)
which is the inversion formula given previously in Eq. (4-47). By
use of the z-transformation the section from w, to +w, on the
-
s-plane
▲ jw Ac+j∞o
X
Poles of
E (s)
X
X
X
--
ji ws
Im z
z-plane
j ws
Poles of
E(z)
ест
· j½ws
σ
-it ws
--jWs
-j ws
(b)
Ic-joo
(a)
Fig. 4-8 Paths of integration of the inversion formula in the s-
plane and the z-plane.
Γ
Re z

68
Chap.
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
path of integration in the s-plane is mapped into the circle of radius
ec centered at the origin in the z-plane, as shown in Fig. 4-8b.
Since E*(s) does not have singularities on or to the right of the
line sc in the s-plane, all singularities of E(z) must lie inside the
circle zer in the z-plane.
Example 4-8
Determine the inverse z-transform of Eq. (4-33) by use of the inversion
formula. From Eq. (4-58),
1
e (nT) = 2 x j $r (z
2
≈(1 − e−ar)
x j ĺr (z = 1) (z - e-ar) 2"
―
-
n-1
dz
(4-59)
where I is a circle which encloses the poles at z = +1 and z = e-ar of E(≈).
The contour integral of Eq. (4-59) can be evaluated using Cauchy's residue
theorem. Thus
e(nT) = Residues of E(z)-1 at the poles of E(2)”−1 (4-60)
Substituting the expression of E(z) into Eq. (4-60) yields.
=
e(nT) Residues of
(1 ear)-1
(≈ − 1)(≈ − e−ar)
at z = 1, z=e-ar (4-61)
from which
e(nT)
=
1- e-an
-anT
(4-62)
It is apparent that the same e*(t) can be obtained from e(nT) as by the
preceding two methods.
4.5 THEOREMS OF THE Z-TRANSFORM
Several basic theorems simplify and facilitate the applications of
the z-transformation. The derivations and illustrations of the z-trans-
form theorems are given below.
1. Addition and Subtraction
If e(t) and e(t) are Laplace transformable and
E₁(z) = Z[e,(t)],
then
Proof: By definition
Hence
E2(x) = [e,(t)],
(4-63)
3[e(t) e(t)] = E₁(2) ± E₂(2)
00
Z[e₁(t) ± e2(t)] = Σ [e₁(nT) ± e2(nT)]z¯"
00
n = 0
Z[e,(t) ± e,(t)] = Σ e,(nT)z¯” ± Σ er(nT)z¯"
(4-64)
n=0
=
E₁(z) ± E2(x)
n=0
(4-65)

Sec. 4.5
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 69
2. Multiplication by a Constant
If E(z) is the z-transform of e(t), then
3[ae(t)] = a 3[e(t)] = aE(z)
(4-66)
where a is a constant.
Proof: By definition
00
∞
Z[ae(t)] = Σ ae(nT)z¯” = a Σ e(nT)z¯” = aE(x) (4-67)
n=0
n=0
3. Real Translation
If the time function e(t) is Laplace transformable and has the
z-transform E(z), then
Z[e(t nT)] = z¯”E(z)
(4-68)
n-1
and
3[e(t + nT)] = x" E(x) − Z e(kT) x¯
-
(4-69)
k=0
where n is a positive integer.
Proof: By definition.
00
Z[e(t - nT)] = Σe(kT – nT)z¯*
which can be written as
-
-n
k=0
00
-
Z[e(t − nT)] = z¯” Σ e(kT
n Σ e(kT − nT) z¯(k−n)
k=0
―
Since e(t) is zero for t<0, Eq. (4-71) becomes
-(k-n)
= z¯" Σe(kT — nT)z¯(k-
-
3[e(t nT)] = 2¯"
k == n
To prove Eq. (4-69), we write
–
Z[e(t + nT)] = Σ e(kT + nT)z¯*
k=0
(4-70)
(4-71)
= z "E(z) (4-72)
= 2" Σ e(kT + nT) z¯(k+n)
k=0
(4-73)
From Eq. (4-73) the reader should be able to derive Eq. (4-69)
without difficulty.
Example 4-9
Using the real translation theorem, evaluate the z-transform of a unit-step
function delayed by one sampling period T. From Eq. (4-68)
or
Z[u(tT)] = z¹Z[u(t)] = ≈¯¹(≈/≈ − 1)
3[u(tT)] = 1/(≈ 1)
-
(4-74)
(4-75)

70
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
Example 4-10
Using the real translation theorem, evaluate the z-transform of the ex-
ponential function e-at delayed by one sampling period. By using Eq. (4-68),
Z[e-all-T)] = z ¯¹ Z[e-at]
The z-transform of e-at is found from the z-transform table; hence
(4-76)
3[e-at-r)] = 2-1
1
=
Z
- e
aT
Z- е-ат
4. Complex Translation
(4-77)
The complex translation theorem states that, if e(t) has the
z-transform E(z), then
3[eal e(t)] = [E(s ± a)] = E(ze±ar)
Proof: By definition
00
Z[e=ªe(t)] = Σ e(nT)eñanṛ‍2¯n
n=0
Let z₁ = zetar; then Eq. (4-79) becomes
00
Z[e™ªr e(t)] = Σe(nT)zī” = E(21)
Therefore,
Example 4-11
n=0
3[eate(t)] = E(ze±ar)
(4-78)
(4-79)
(4-80)
(4-81)
Using the complex translation theorem, evaluate the z-transform of the
function eat sin wt. From the z-transform table (Table 4-1), the z-transform
of e-at sin ot is found to be
3[e-at sin ot]
ze-ar sin @T
=
22
―
2ze-ar
cos @T+e
and the z-transform of sin wt is
[sin wt] =
z sin @T
22-2z cos @T+1
-2aT
(4-82)
(4-83)
Using Eq. (4-78), Eq. (4-82) may apparently be obtained by substituting
ze+ar for z in Eq. (4-83).
5. Initial Value Theorem
If the function e(t) has the z-transform E(z) and if the limit
exists, then
lim E(2)
2→∞
lim e* (t) = lim E(z)
(4-84)
(4-85)
0-1
2→00
The theorem simply states that the behavior of the sampled function

Sec. 4.5
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 71
e*(t) in the neighborhood of t = 0 is determined by the behavior of
E(z) at z∞.
Proof: By definition of the z-transform e(t),
00
E(x) = Σ e(nT) x¯” = e(0) + e(T)x¯¹ + e(2T)x¯²+... (4-86)
72=0
Hence
lim E(z)
=
e(0) = lim e*(t)
t→0
(4-87)
6. Final Value Theorem
-
If the function e(t) has the z-transform E(z) and if the function
(1 − z ¹)E(z) does not have poles on or outside the unit circle in
the z-plane, then
lim e*(t) = lim e(nT)
∞ - U
=
lim (1
-
z-¹)E(z)
2-1
Proof: Let us consider two finite sequences,
Že(kT)z˜¯* = e(0) + e(T)x¯¹ + ... e(nT)x¯"
k=0
and
(4-88)
(4-89)
Σ e[(k − 1)T]z¯* = e(0)x¯¹ + e(T)x´² + . . . + e[(n − 1)T]z¯"
−
k=0
-
(4-90)
We assume that e(t) is defined only for time greater than zero so
that the term e(-T) that would have appeared in the last equation
is zero. Now comparing Eq. (4-89) with Eq. (4-90), we see that the
latter can also be written as
n
-k
-
Ź e[(k − 1)T]x¯*
k=0
n-1
= z¹Σe(kT) z¯*
k=0
Subtracting Eq. (4-91) from Eq. (4-89) yields
n
- k
271
7-1
Že(kT) x¯*
k
k=0
z − x ¯¹ Σe(kT) z¯*
k=0
x
-k
(4-91)
(4-92)
Taking the limit of the last equation as z approaches unity, we get
7-1
77
lim
1-2
k=0
[ Σe(kT) z
-k
-
2¯¹ = c(kT) z¯*]
k=0
= Σ e(kT) – Z e(kT) = e(nT)
=
k=0
-
k=0
(4-93)
Again, if we take the limit as n approaches infinity, Eq. (4-93)
becomes
77
n-1
lim e(nT)
=
lim lime(kT)z¯¹
-1
-
1-2 ∞+u
¹ Σe(kT) z¯*] (4-94)
k=0

72
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
Interchange the limits on the right-hand side of Eq. (4-94), and since
n
n-1
lim Ze(kT)x-* = lim ≥ e(kT)x¯* = E(2)
n∞0 k=0
the final-value theorem reads
k=0
lim e(nT) = lim (12¹)E(z)
7200
2-1
(4-95)
(4-96)
Example 4-12
Given the z-transform
0.79222
E(z)
=
(≈ − 1)(≈² — 0.416≈ + 0.208)
determine the final value of e(nT) by use of the final-value theorem.
Since
し
​(1 − z¯¹)E(z) =
=
0.79222
0.4162+0.208)
(4-97)
(4-98)
does not possess poles on or outside the unit circle in the z-plane, the final
value theorem may be applied. Thus from Eq. (4-88)
lim e(nT)
0.792≈2
= lim
= 1
N→∞
2-1
22 · 0.4162 + 0.208
(4-99)
This result can be checked readily by expanding E(z) in powers of ¹.
Expansion of E(z) by long division yields.
E(2)
= 0.792x+1.12z-2 + 1.09123 +1.01≈4 +0.9832-5
-7
+ 0.9892-6 + 0.99%¯² +
(4-100)
The coefficient of this series converges rapidly to its final steady state value
of unity.
7. Partial Differentiation Theorem
Let the z-transform of the function e(t, a) be denoted by E(z, a),
where a is an independent variable or a constant. The z-transform
of the partial derivative of e(t, a) with respect to a is given by
3{32[e(t,a)]} = 3 E(x, a)
Proof: By definition
00
да
{le(t, a)]} = Σe(nT, a) z¯”
N=0
(4-101)
ə
∞
Ә
=
-n
да
Σe(nT, a) z¯" = E(x,a) (4-102)
7=0
да
The following example illustrates that the z-transforms of certain
types of functions may be obtained easily if the partial differential
theorem is applied.

Sec. 4.6
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 73
Example 4-13
Determine the z-transform of e(t) = te-at by use of the partial differential
theorem. The z-transform of e(t) is
3[e(1)] = 3[te-at] = 3[-13 2e-at]
e-at] =
-33[e-a]
a
From Eq. (4-101),
მ
да
3 [−23 --]) = -32, 3(-1) = -3(---)]
-ar
-e
=
Tze-ar
(≈ − e−ar)²
2
(4-103)
(4-104)
4.6 THE PULSE TRANSFER FUNCTION
Thus far our examination of sampled-data systems has been con-
fined to the discussions of the properties and mathematical representa-
tion of the sampled signals, namely, the z-transformation. The situation
must be investigated when a sampled signal is applied to the input
terminals of a system with linear
elements.
For the linear open-loop system
with a continuous signal e(t) as
shown in Fig. 4-9, the transfer
function
e(t)
c(t)
Input
G(s)
E(s)
C(s)
Fig. 4-9 Linear system with continuous
signal.
G(s) = C(s)/E(s)
(4-105)
·
completely describes the relationship between the continuous input
and output signals. If the same system is now subjected to a sampled
signal as shown in Fig. 4-10, the Laplace transform of the system
output can be written as
C(s)
=
E*(s)G(s)
(4-106)
Fictitious sampler
c*(1)
S2
T C*(s)
e(t)
e (1)
c(t)
G(s)
E(s)
TE (s)
C(s)
S₁
Fig. 4-10 Linear system with sampled-data.
where E*(s) is the Laplace transform of the sampled signal e*(t).
Since we have developed a wealth of z-transform theories and tech-
niques in the preceding sections, it is reasonable to expect that the
analysis of the system with sampled-data shown in Fig. 4-10 will be

74
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
simplified if the z-transformation is applied. Under the present situa-
tion, the input is in sampled form; thus we can form E(z) from E*(s)
simply by introducing the transformation z = e. The z-transform
of the system output is defined as C(2); therefore, C(z) describes
c(t) only at the sampling instants. In order to characterize the
sampled-data system in the z-domain, we expect to derive an expres-
sion of the form
C(z) G(z)E(z)
=
(4-107)
for example, where C(z) and E(z) are defined as above; but G(z)
at this stage can be interpreted only as the z-transform of something
that apparently depends on the system transfer function G(s). (As
it turns out of course the function, G(z), is obtained exactly by
taking the z-transform of G(s) or the z-transform of the impulse
response g(t) of the linear system G.) Therefore, the meaning of
G(z) in Eq. (4-107) must be determined along with the relationship
between G(z) and G(s).
Suppose that in the system shown in Fig. 4-10 a unit-step function
is applied at the input of the sampler S. at t = 0 and the sampler
is closed only at t=0 and then remains opened thereafter. Under
this condition the output of the ideal sampler consists only of an
impulse of unit area occurring at t=0. The output of the system,
c(t) in response to this unit-impulse input is simply the impulse
response g(t) of the system. Thus
c(t) = g(t) = impulse response of system G
(4-108)
If a fictitious sampler S, with the same sampling rate as that of
S (the two samplers are assumed to be synchronized) is placed at
the system output, the output of the switch S, is described by the
following equation:
-
c*(t) = g*(t) = Σ g(nT)8(t − nT)
n=0
(4-109)
where c(nT) = g(nT) is defined as the "weighting sequence" of the
system. The signals, e(t), e*(t), c(t), and c*(t), for this case are
illustrated in Fig. 4-11. The Laplace transform of g*(t) is now written
00
G*(s) = Σ g(nT) e¯nrs
n=0
(4-110)
and is defined as the "pulse transfer function" of the system G.
We can summarize our findings at this point as follows: When a
unit-impulse function is applied to a linear system with transfer func-
tion G(s), the output of the system is simply the impulse response
of the system. The output of the fictitious sampler S2 is a sequence
of impulses; the area of each impulse is equal to the value of the

Sec. 4.6
75
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
e(t)
о
(0)
g(1)
O
e*(t) Impulse of unit strength
9* (1)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 4-11 Signals of sampled-data system in Fig. 4-10. (a) Unit
step function. (b) Sampled input, unit impulse. (c) Impulse
response. (d) Weighting sequence.
impulse response g(t) at the corresponding sampling instant. This
impulse sequence is also called the weighting sequence of the system.
The Laplace transform of the weighting sequence gives the pulse
transfer function G*(s).
Once the weighting sequence of a linear system is defined by
means of the principle of superposition, the output c(t) and c*(t) of
the system in response to any arbitrary input can be obtained. Assume
that an arbitrary function e(t) is applied to the system of Fig. 4-10
at t = 0; the sampled input signal to G is simply the sequence
e(nT). At time t = nT, the output sample c(nT) is the sum of the
effects of all sample e(nT), e(n − 1)T, e(n − 2)T, . . . e(0); that is,
c(nT) = Σ Effects of all samples, e(nT), e(n − 1)T, . . ., e(0)
or
-
-
-
c(nT) = e(0)g(nT) + e(T)g(n − 1)T + e(2T)g(n − 2)T
+ ... + e(n − 1)Tg(T) + e(nT)g(0)
(4-111)
(4-112)
Multiplying both sides of the last equation by e-nrs and taking the
summation from n 0 to n = ∞ yields
∞
∞
Σ c(nT)e¯nrs = Σ e(0)g(nT)e="rs + Σ e(T)g[(n − 1)T]e¬nTs
−
N=0
n=0
71=0

76 THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
Chap. 4
10
or
∞
+
. . . + Σ e[(n − 1)T]g(T)e="Ts
n=0
+ Σe(nT)g(0)e="rs
N=0
Σc(nT)ents = [e(0) + e(T)e¯™
72=0
(4-113)
+e(2T) e¯2Ts +
•
.
Equation (4-114) is written
00
Σc(nT)e-nts
=
7=0
or simply
00
-nTs
00
.]Σg(nT)e-nrs (4-114)
∞
n=0
Σe(nT) e¬nts Σg(nT) e¯nts (4-115)
n=0
71=0
C*(s) = E*(s)G*(s)
Taking the z-transform on both sides of Eq. (4-116) yields
C(z) = E(z)G(z)
(4-116)
(4-117)
which is the z-transform relation of the sampled-data system. G(z)
is often referred to as the "z-transfer function" of the linear sampled-
data system.
Therefore, the z-transfer function G(z) relates the sampled input
E(z) to the z-transform of the output C(z) in the same way as the
ordinary transfer function G(s) does for E(s) and C(s). Take note,
however, that the actual output of the sampled-data system, c(t), is
still continuous with respect to time because of the smoothing prop-
erties of system components. However, the z-transform analysis
described by Eq. (4-117), which relies on the addition of the ficti-
tious sampler S2, gives information on c(t) only at the sampling
instants. This is certainly one of the disadvantages of the z-transform
method. In certain cases the loss of the information concerning
response between sampling instants may not be vital; e.g., if the
value of c(t) does not vary appreciably between sampling instants.
On the other hand, if c(t) contains large-amplitude oscillations between
sampling instants, the z-transform method can at best provide an
approximation to the actual response and sometimes may even provide
misleading results. Still another comment is that in view of Eq.
(4-110) the z-transfer function G(z) is derived from the impulse
response g(t) in exactly the same manner as E(2) is derived from
any signal e(t). Thus G(z) may be determined by any methods.
described in Sec. 4-2 or directly from the z-transform table.
The z-transfer function relation given by Eq. (4-117) can also be
derived from the relation between E*(s) and E(s) stated in Eq.
(2-68). The Laplace transform of the system output of the system
in Fig. 4-10 is

Sec. 4.6
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 77
C(s) = E*(s)G(s)
(4-118)
From the pulse-transform on both sides of the last equation and from
the relation of Eq. (2-68), we have
00
C* (s) = = Σ C(s + jnws,) = † Σ E*(s + jnw,)G(s + jnw,)
T
N=1∞
00
1
T
N=1∞
(4-119)
In Eq. (2-72), E*(s) has been shown to be a periodic function; that
is E*(s) = E*(s + jnw.), where n is an integer. Equation (4-119) can
now be written as
C*(s) = E*(s) ¦ Σ G(s + jnw,)
T n=-∞
∞
and if we define
G*(s) = = Σ G(s + jnws)
Eq. (4-120) reads
C*(s) E*(s)G*(s)
= =
(4-120)
(4-121)
(4-122)
Equation (4-121) again shows that the definition of the pulse transfer
function G*(s) is the same as that of any signal e(t). In the follow-
ing explanations the z-transfer functions of some simple open-loop
sampled-data systems will be derived.
1. Z-Transfer Function Relations of Cascaded Elements With
Sampling Switch Between Them
Figure 4-12 illustrates a sampled-data system with cascaded ele-
ments G and G. The two elements are separated by a second
sampling switch S₂ synchronized to S₁ (the two switches have the
Fictitious
sampler
c(t)
---
C(s)
e(t) X e*(t)
G₁(s)
E(s)
S₁ E*(s)
d(t)_d*(t)
D(s) S₂ D(s)
c(t)
G₂(s)
C(s)
Fig. 4-12 Sampled-data system with cascaded elements (sampler
separates the two elements).
same sampling period and operate at the same instants). The z-
transform relation between the output and the input signals is derived
as follows: The output signal of G₁ is
=
D(s) G₁(s)E* (s)
and the system output is
=
C(s) G₂(s)D*(s)
(4-123)
(4-124)

78
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
Taking the pulse transform on both sides of Eq. (4-123) yields
D*(s) = G*(s)E*(s)
(4-125)
Substituting D*(s) from Eq. (4-125) into Eq. (4-124) yields
C(s) = G₂(s)G*(s)E*(s)
(4-126)
The pulse transform of C(s) gives
C*(s) = G (s)G*(s)E*(s)
(4-127)
and the z-transform of C(s) is
C(z) = G₁(z)G₂(z)E(z)
(4-128)
Therefore, the z-transform of two linear elements separated by a
sampler is equal to the product of the z-transforms of the two elements.
2. Z-Transform of Cascaded Elements With No Sampling Switches
Between Them
Fictitious
sampler
c(1).
C(s)
c(t)
C(s)
e(t)
E!!) G(5)
E(s)
d(t)
D(s)
G₂(s)
Fig. 4-13 Sampled-data system with cascaded elements (no
sampler between the two elements).
A sampled-data system with two cascaded elements is shown in
Fig. 4-13; there is no sampler between the elements. The z-transform
relation of the output and the input signals is derived as follows:
The transform of the continuous output is
C(s) = G₁(s)G₂(s)E*(s)
(4-129)
Taking the pulse transform on both sides of the last equation yields
C*(s) = G₁G (s)E*(s)
where G.G(s) is defined as
00
(4-130)
G₁G;(s) = [G₁(s)G₂(s)]* = ¦ Σ G₁(s + jnw,)G₂(s + jnw.)
T N118
Note that in general.
G.G (s) G*(s)G* (s)
Now taking the z-transform of Eq. (4-130) yields
=
C(z) G₁G₂(z)E(z)
(4-131)
(4-132)
(4-133)
where G.G₂(2) denotes the z-transform of the product of G₁(s) and

Sec. 4.7
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 79
G(s). Thus the z-transform of two cascaded elements with no sampler
between them is equal to the z-transform of the product of the
Laplace transforms of the two elements. The following example
illustrates the difference between Eq. (4-128) and Eq. (4-133).
Example 4-14
For the sampled-data systems shown in Fig. 4-12 and Fig. 4-13, given.
G,(s) 1/s and G₂(s) = a/(s + a), determine the z-transform of the output c(t)
when the input is a unit-step function.
For the system of Fig. 4-13 the z-transform of the output is obtained from
Eq. (4-133).
a
C(z) = G₁G₂(z)E(z) = Z 5(s + a
E(z)
=
=
z²(1 − e−ar)
(x-1)2(z-e-aT)
е
Σ
z(1 - e-ar)
(≈ − 1)(≈ − e−ar) (≈ − 1)
(4-134)
The output z-transform of the system in Fig. 4-12 is obtained by use of
Eq. (4-128).
C(z) = G,(≈)G₂(≈)E(≈) = (≈ ~ 1) (≈
=
-
az³
-e
az
(z = 1)
(4-135)
(≈ − 1)²(z — e¯ar)
-
Evidently, the output z-transforms of the two systems are not alike.
4.7 LIMITATIONS OF THE Z-TRANSFORM METHOD
In the preceding sections we have seen that the z-transformation
is a very convenient tool for the study of linear systems with
sampled-data. However, the z-transform method has limitations; and
in certain cases, care must be taken in the applications of the z-
transforms.
(1) In the first place we must realize that the derivation of the
z-transform method is based upon the assumption that the sampled
signal is approximated by a train of impulses whose areas are equal
to the input signal of the sampler at the sampling instants. This
assumption is considered valid only if the sampling duration of the
sampler is small when compared with the significant time constant
of the system.
(2) The z-transform of the output of a linear system, C(z),
specifies only the values of the time function c(t) at the sampling
instants; C(z) does not contain any information concerning the value
of c(t) between sampling instants. Therefore, given any C(z), the
inverse z-transform c(nT) describes c(t) only at the sampling instants
= nT.
t =

80
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
(3) In analyzing a sampled-data system by z-transform method,
the transfer function G(s) must have at least two more poles than
zeros (or equivalently, the impulse response of G(s) must not have
any jump behavior at t = 0). Otherwise, the system response obtained
by the z-transform method is unrealistic and sometimes even incorrect.
1 ohm
Input Sampling
e(t)
device
1 farad
Output
c(t)
Fig. 4-14 An R-C integrating network. The input terminals of
the R-C network are assumed to be short circuited when the
sampler is opened.
In order to illustrate the points mentioned above, let us consider
the R-C integrating circuit shown in Fig. 4-14. The transfer function
of the circuit is G(s) = 1/(s + 1), and the corresponding z-transform
is G(x) = x/(x − e−7). If the input to the sampler is a unit step
function, the z-transform of the output signal is
-
C(z) = R(z) G(z) =
R(2)G(z)
22
=
(≈ − 1)(x − e¯”) (≈ 1)(≈
z2
0.368)
(4-136)
where the sampler has a sampling period of one second. The value
of c(t) at the sampling instants are determined by expanding C(x)
in the inverse power of z. Therefore,
-1
-2
C(z) = 1 + 1.3682¯¹ + 1.52‍² + 1.55%¯³ + 1.56%¯¹ +
3
c*(1)
1.585
(4-137)
о
T 2T 37 4T 5T 6T 77
Fig. 4-15 Output signal at the sampling instants of the R-C net-
work with sampled-data (Fig. 4-14) (Result obtained by z-trans-
form method).
from which the sampled output c*(t) is obtained as shown in Fig.
4-15. Note that the output transform C(z) specifies the values of
c(t) at the sampling instants only and does not give even the slightest
indication of what the behavior of c(t) is in between the sampling
instants. As a matter of fact, if the input to the network is assumed
to be an impulse train, we can show very easily by the impulse

Sec. 4.7
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 81
c(t)
1.585
wwwww
T 2T 3T 4T 5T 6T 7T
0.585
t
Fig. 4-16 Actual output response of the R-C network with
sampled-data shown in Fig. 4-14 (Result obtained by impulse
response method or the Laplace transform method).
response method or the Laplace transform method that the actual
response of the network is of the form shown in Fig. 4-16. Further-
more, the z-transform method gives the result with a jump in c(t)
at t = 0. This is because the method relies on the assumption that
the sampler output is an impulse train. However, if the actual pulses
of finite pulse widths are considered, this jump will not occur.
As another example, consider that the capacitor in the R-C net-
work of Fig. 4-14 is now replaced by an inductor of 1 henry. The
transfer function of the R-L network is s/(s + 1), and the z-transform
is
G(x)=
(4-138)
I
Input Sampling¦
e(t)
i device
-0.368
=
2
- 0.368
1 ohm
ww
1 henry
Output
c(t)
Fig. 4-17 An R-L network with sampled-data. The input ter-
minals of the R-L network are assumed to be short circuited
when the sampler is opened.
for T = 1 sec. For a unit step input the output z-transform is
C(z)
=
-0.368z
(z − 1)(≈ — 0.368)
-
-
-1
Expanding C(z) into a power series of z¹ yields
=
(4-139)
C(z) 0.36821 0.5032-2 -0.5512-30.5682-... (4-140)
The values of c(nT) given by Eq. (4-140) are depicted in Fig. 4–18.
The z-transform method leads to results that have the output response
starting with a zero value at t = 0; but judging from the impulse.
response of the R-L network, we see that c(t) must contain an
impulse of strength equal to unity at t = 0. From the principle of

82
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
c*(t)
T
2T
3T 4T 5T 6T 7T 8T
-0.585
Fig. 4-18 Output signal of R-L network with sampled-data shown
in Fig. 4-17. (Result obtained by z-transform method; response
at the sampling instants only.)
...
superposition, we know that there must also be unit impulses at
t = T, 2T, 3T, . . . in c(t). The correct reponse when the input is
a train of impulses is obtained by the impulse response method and
is shown in Fig. 4-19. In the case of the previous example, whereas
the z-transform method does give correct results at the sampling in-
stants, the z-transform technique breaks down completely here.
4.8 RESPONSE OF OPEN-LOOP SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
BETWEEN SAMPLING INSTANTS
Although we have seen that the z-transform method is conven-
ient in the study of open-loop systems with sampled-data, (closed-
loop systems will be treated in the next chapter) z-transform
analysis yields no information on system response between sampling
instants. A complete description of any system response almost always
necessitates a knowledge of the waveform between sampling
instants. Several methods have been developed for the evaluation of
Impulses of unit area
c(t) 1
-1.585
T
27 3T 4T
5T 6T 7T 8T
0.585
m
Fig. 4-19 Actual output response of the R-L network with
sampled-data in Fig. 4-17. (Result obtained by impulse response
method.)
+ E. I. Jury, Sampled-Data Control Systems (New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
1958), pp. 64-72.

Sec. 4.8
83
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
Fictitious
sampler
S₁
T c(t)
e(t)
X_e*(1)
G(s)
So
c(t)
Sampler
(a)
Sampler
e(t)
e (t) e '(1)
•(n) = (x *(n) (G(3)
So Sno
T/n
Fictitious
sampler
(b)
Fictitious sampler
S₁ T c(t)
c(t)
Sp1
T/n c*(t)n
Fictitious sampler
Fig. 4-20 (a) Open-loop sampled-data system. (b) Open-loop
sampled-data system with fictitious samplers for the evaluation
of response between sampling instants.
response of sampled-data systems between sampling instants. Among
these methods, the submultiple sampling method and the modified
z-transform method are common. The state variable approachs which
will be introduced in chapter 5 is also quite convenient for the study of
intersampling behavior of sampled systems. The analysis of open-loop
systems by means of the z-transform methods is discussed below.
1. The Submultiple Sampling Method
Consider the open-loop sampled-data system shown in Fig. 4-20a.
The sampling switch S. samples at uniform intervals of T seconds.
The ordinary z-transform of the output response, C(z), is obtained
↑ W. K. Linvill and R. W. Sittler, "Extension of Conventional Techniques to the
Design of Sampled-Data Systems," Part I, I. R. E. Convention Record, New York,
1953, pp. 99-104.
R. H. Barker, "The Pulse Transfer Function and its Application to Sampling Servo
Systems," Proc. I. E. E., London, 99, Part 4, 1952, pp. 302-317; and E.I. Jury, "Synthesis
and Critical Study of Sampled-Data Control Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 75, Part 2,
1956, pp. 141-151.
§ R. E. Kalman and J. E. Bertram, "A Unified Approach to the Theory of Sampling
Systems," Journal of Franklin Institute, 267, May 1959, pp. 405–436.

84
Chap.
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
by first taking the Laplace transform of the output of the fictitious
sampler S, and then making the substitution of z = e. In order to
recover the lost information in between the sampling instants, fictitious
samplers Sno and S with sampling period T/n, where n = 1, 2, 3,...,
are inserted respectively between the sampler S. and G(s) and at
the output terminal. The fictitious samplers are not physical com-
ponents; they are used simply to facilitate the calculation of the
system response during the sampling period.
Since the input to the fictitious sampler Sno is a train of impulses
of period T (spaced at T seconds apart) and since Sno is sampling
at a rate n times as fast as So, the insertion of the switch Sno does
not in any way affect the original system behavior. Therefore, the
system shown in Fig. 4-20b which includes the two fictitious samplers
has exactly the same behavior as that of the original system in Fig.
4-20a. The continuous output c(t) of the system in Fig. 4-20b may
be written as a sum of impulse responses. Thus
00
c(t) = Σ e(mT)g(t − mT)
m=0
(m = integer)
(4-141)
where g(t) is the impulse response of the system G. At any sampling
instant t = kT/n of the sampler Sni, (k = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .), the value
of the output signal is equal to
kT
c(T) = Σe(mT) 8 (T-mT)
g
(4-142)
The output of the fictitious sampler Sn can now be written as
00
c* (t)n = Σ c( kT )8 (t − kT)
k=0
n
Taking the z-transform on both sides of Eq. (4-143) yields
k/n
C(z)n = Z[c*(t)n] = Σ c(KT) 2 - Kn
ΣΤ)
(4-143)
(4-144)
If we compare Eq. (4-144) with the ordinary z-transform of c(t),
we see that they are related by
C(z)n = [C(z)]z=21/n
T=T/n
1/n
1
(4-145)
Therefore, the z-transform of the output of sampler Sn is equal to
the z-transform of c*(t) with z replaced by z and T replaced by
T/n. Substituting Eq. (4-142) into Eq. (4-144), we have
∞
∞
C(2)n = Σ Σ e(mT) 8 (*T
kT
g
mT) x
-kin
(4-146)
k=0 M=0
Letting (
-
n
n
m) = 1, where v is an integer, Eq. (4-146) can be
written as

Sec. 4.8
85
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
Hence
where
00
-v/n
C(x)n = Σ 8(º1 ) 2¯³/≈ Σ e(mT) x¯"
v=0
g
n
m=0
C(z)n = G(z),E(z)
(4-147)
(4-148)
(4-149)
00
G(z)n =
Z 8(VT)x-
vT -v/n
=
[G(x)]2=21/n
n
T-T/n
V=0
g
Equation (4-149) implies that the response between the sampling
instants can be evaluated by use of the ordinary z-transforms; the
number of points on c(t) at which the values are desired determines
the value of n. For instance, if in addition to the values at the
normal sampling instants, t = 0, T, 2T, . . ., the values of c(t) at
two other points between two consecutive sampling instants are
desired, n is set equal to 3. In general, if q is the number of addi-
tional sampled values desired between two consecutive sampling
instants, n = q + 1.
Example 4-15
For the system shown in Fig. 4-20a, G(s) = 1/(s + 1). The ordinary z-
transform of G(s) is G(z) = 2/(≈ − e−7). By means of Eq. (4-149), we have
=
-
21/n
G(≈)n = [G(2)];= ;1/n = 21/n - e-T/n
T=T/n
=
21/n
1/n
e
(4-150)
for T = 1 sec. If in addition to the values of c(t) at the regular sampling
instants, we desire to know the values of c(t) also at two other points (at
uniform intervals) within the sampling period (one sec), we set n = 3 in
Eq. (4-150). Thus
G(z) =
21/3
21/3 - 0.717
(4-151)
It is interesting to note that the inverse z-transform of G(z), yields values of
the impulse response g(t) not only at the actual sampling instants of t = = 0,
1, 2, . . . seconds, but also at t
This is done as fol-
lows: Let z1/3 =
=
1/3, 2/3, 4/3, 5/3,
...
z3; then z = 23. Equation (4-151) now reads
G(z);=
-0.7171 +0.7172 +0.515z² + 0.368z³
Z3
+ 0.26423 +0.189255+0.1365236 +0.097237+...
(4-152)
In the last equation, the values of g(t) at the fictitious sampling instants are
represented by the respective coefficients of the series expansion of G(z)3.
Therefore, g(0) = 1, g() = 0.717, g() = 0.515, g(1) = 0.368, g(†) = 0.264,
g() = 0.189, g(2) = 0.136, etc. If the input to the system is a unit-step
function, E(z) = x/(≈ 1). From Eq. (4-148), for n = 3,
-
C(z)3 = G(z)3E(z)
Substitution of E(z) and G(z), into Eq. (4-153) yields
23
C(2)₁ =
-
23 — 0.717 23 - 1
(4-153)
(4-154)

86
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
or
C(2)3 =
(≈3 − 0.717) (≈3 − 1)
-
(4-155)
Expanding C(z), into a power series in z¹ yields
-3
C(2)3 = 1 +0.717z' +0.514zz² + 1.368z5³ + 0.98z+0.70323-5
-8
+1.504z3 + 1.08237 + 0.773zz³ + 1.55zz° +
...
(4-156)
The waveform of c*(t), is plotted in Fig. 4-21. In this case, the response
between sampling instants may be estimated by determining two additional
sampled values between consecutive sampling instants.
*(1)
1.58
Final value of c(t)
c(t)
T
2T 3T 4T
Fig. 4-21 Output response of fictitious submultiple-sampling
sampler of the system in Example 4-15.
2. The Modified Z-Transform Method
Another interesting and powerful method which may be used to
evaluate the response between sampling instants of a sampled-data
system is the modified z-transform method. The method was first
introduced by Barkert of England and then later was developed by
Jury in this country. The method is essentially a modification of
the ordinary z-transform technique obtained by inserting fictitious trans-
portation lags (time delays) in the sampled-data system. By varying the
amount of transportation lag in a prescribed manner, we may recover
virtually all the information contained in the continuous signal be-
tween sampling instants.
The Delayed z-Transform In order to understand the development
R. H. Barker, "The Pulse Transfer Function and its Application to Sampling Servo
Systems," Proc. I. E. E., London, 99, Part 4, 1952, pp. 302-317.
E. I. Jury, "Synthesis and Critical Study of Sampled-Data Control Systems," Trans.
A. I. E. E., 75, Part 2, 1956, pp. 141-151; and E. I. Jury, “Additions to the Modified
z-transform Method," I. R. E. WESCON Convention Record, Part 4, August 21, 1957, pp.
136-156.

Sec. 4.8
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 87
of the modified z-transform, we should first study the ordinary z-
transformation of impulse sequences derived from time functions
delayed by non-integral multiples of the sampling period T. Recall
that the z-transform of time functions delayed by integral multiples
of T may be obtained easily by means of the real translation theorem
stated in Sec. 4.5, Eq. (4-68). For instance, the z-transform of the
time function e(t - XT), where X is an integer, in simply equal to
2 times the z-transform of e(t). However, for a time function e(t)
that is delayed by kT where k is a noninteger a different treatment
is necessary. Let us consider the waveform of the time function
shown in Fig. 4-22a. The time function e(t) is shown to be delayed
by time kT where k is not an integer. This delayed time function.
is now sampled at t = 0, T, 2T, . . ., the regular sampling intervals,
so that the resultant impulse train is as shown in Fig. 4-22b. (Note
that this is not the same as sampling e(t) at t = kT, (k + 1)T,……….)
Therefore, the samples of the delayed function may be represented by
=
∞
e*(t − kT) = Σ e(nT — kT)d(t − nT)
n0
-
-
-
(4-157)
integers 0, 1, 2, . . . Let us now break.
where k noninteger, and n =
up k into two parts, so that
k = λ + A
(4-158)
where is the largest integer less than k, and ▲ is a positive number
less than one. Substituting the relation in Eq. (4–158) into Eq. (4–157)
yields
∞
__
e* (t − kT) = Σ e(nT – XT -
Σ e(nT – XT — AT)d(t − nT)
7=0
-
—
-
(4-159)
Applying z-transformation to both sides of the last equation, we have
Z[e(t − kT )] = Σ e[nT — XT — AT)z˜”
-
n=0
―
-
n
(4-160)
Since XT is an integral multiple of T, we may regard the z-transform
in Eq. (4-160) as the z-transform of e(t − ▲T) delayed by XT. Thus
00
-
Z[e(t − kT)]
-λ
= ~
Σe(nT-AT) z¯n
(4-161)
When λ = 0, Eq. (4-161) becomes
-
00
N=0
Z[e(t − AT)] = Σ e(nT — AT)x¯”
n2=0
-
(4-162)
which is sometimes referred to as the delayed z-transform of e(t)
and is denoted by E(z, A); that is,
E(z, A) =
-
Z[e(t − AT)]
(4-163)

88 THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
Chap. 4
The calculation of the delayed z-transform of a time function is now
illustrated by an example.
Example 4-16
Derive the delayed z-transform for the time function eat that is delayed
by 0.5T second.
By use of Eq. (4-162), we have
E(z, ▲ = 0.5) = Z[e(t − 0.5T)] = Σ e¯a(nr−0.5T) 2-n
-
n=0
= 60.5ar
e-anr. z-n
n=0
Writing E(z, 0.5) in a closed form, we have
(4-164)
E(z, 0.5)
=
e0.5αT
1 - e-arz-1
aT
(4-165)
e(t)
e(t-kT)
KT
(a)
elt-kT)
e*(t-kT)
O T
KT 4T 6T 8T 1OT
3T 5T 7T 9T
(b)
Fig. 4-22 (a) Delayed time function. (b) Impulse sequence of
delayed time function.
Modified z-Transfer Function of Open-Loop Sampled-Data Systems
The delayed z-transform defined above may be applied to the evalua-
tion of responses of sampled-data systems between sampling instants.
Consider the open-loop system shown in Fig. 4-23a. The z-transform
of c(t), C(z), describes the output response at the sampling instants
only. Since the actual output of the system is continuous with respect
to time, a modified z-transfer function may be derived to provide a
relation between the sampled input and the continuous output. In

Sec. 4.8
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 89
other words, in contrast to the ordinary z-transfer function G(z),
which gives the relation between the sampled input E(z) and the
sampled output C(z) as
C(x) = G(x)E(z)
(4-166)
we shall derive a modified z-transfer function G(z, m) for the system
such that
C(z, m) = G(z, m) E(z)
(4-167)
where m is a constant and C(z, m) is called the modified z-transform
of c(t). By assigning proper values for m, we may obtain virtually
all information of c(t) from C(z, m) by taking the inverse modified
z-transform. We shall show how this is done in the following.
If we introduce a fictitious delay AT in the forward path of the
system of Fig. 4-23a, we have the modified system shown in Fig.
4-23b. For reasons that will be clear later, the delay ▲ is chosen
as a fraction of the sampling period. Now consider that an impulse
of unit strength is applied as input e*(t) at t = 0 to the system of
Fig. 4-23b. The output of the system is just the impulse of the
system G delayed by time AT.
c(+)
C(z)
E(s) E*(s)
c(t)
G(s)
e(t)
e*(t)
C(s)
(a)
c(t-AT)
C(z,m)
E(s)
E (s)
C(s)
G(s)
e-AT
e(t) T
e (t)
c(t) L.
c(t-AT)
Fictitious time
delay
(b)
Fig. 4-23 (a) Open-loop system with sampled data. (b) Open-
loop sampled-data system with fictitious time delay.
Therefore,
-
-
-
c(t − AT) = g(t − AT)u(t − AT)
(4-168)
The sampling of this delayed impulse response by the fictitious
sampler at the output gives the delayed weighting sequence: 0,
g(TAT), g(2T – AT), g(3T - AT), . . .. The output signal of
the fictitious sampler may be written as

90 THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
Chap. 4
-
g* (t −
– AT) = Σ g(nT – AT)8(t − nT)
n=0
-
(4-169)
Taking the z-transform on both sides of the last equation yields
∞
-n
G(z, ▲) = Σ g(nT – AT) z¯”
A) Σg(nT
n=0
-
(4-170)
G(z, A) is called the "modified z-transfer function" of the linear
system G. When compared with the ordinary z-transfer function G(z),
G(z, ▲) gives values of g(t) at all times when ▲ is varied from zero
to unity, whereas G(z) defines g(t) only at the sampling instants.
For instance, if the sampling period is one second and if we want to
know the values of g(t) at t 0.3 sec, 1.3 sec, 2.3 sec,
simply set A = 0.7 sec, and the fictitious sampler will give the
impulse sequence: 0, g(0.3T), g(1.3T), . . . g(nT – AT), .
=
-
....
we
At this point we may let
A = 1 - m
(4-171)
Since ▲ is a number lying between 0 and 1, m is also a positive
number lying between 1 and 0. With this A-to-m substitution, Eq.
(4-170) becomes
00
-
G(x, ▲) = Σ g(nT − T + mT)z¯”
72=0
∞
=
Σ g[(n + m)T − T]z¯
(4-172)
n=0
The modified z-transform given by the last equation can be regarded
as the z-transform of g(n + m)T delayed by time T. Therefore,
-1
00
G(z, m) = G(z, ▲) |a=1-m = 2¯¹ Σ g[(n + m)T]z¯” (4-173)
n=0
=
0,
The derivation of Eq. (4-167) is similar to that of its counterpart
for the ordinary z-transform given in Sec. 4.6. Assume that at t
an arbitrary time function e(t) is applied to the system of Fig. 4-
23b. The sampled input signal of the system is simply the impulse
sequence e(0), e(T), . . . e(nT), . . .. The output of the open-loop
system is denoted by c(t - AT); and the output of the fictitious
sampler is the impulse sequence: c(TAT), c(2T – AT), . . .
c(nT - AT), . . . . At any time t = nT the output sample c(nT – AT)
is equal to the sum of the effects of all samples e(n − 1)T, e(n − 2)T,
... e(0): that is
--
-
c(nT − ▲T) = e(0)g(nT – ▲AT) + e(T)g[(n − 1)T – AT]
+ e(2T)g[(n − 2)T − ▲T] +
+ e[(n − 1)T]g[(T — AT)]
(4-174)

Sec. 4.8
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 91
Multiplying both sides of Eq. (4-174) by z¯" and taking the sum-
mation from n = 0 to n = ∞, we have
Σ c(nT – AT)z¯” = Σ e(nT)x¯” Ž g(nT − AT)x¯” (4-175)
77=0
or simply
where m = 1 − ▲ and
n=0
n=0
C(z,m) = E(z)G(x,m)
(4-176)
c(t)
c*(t)
C(T) C(27)
t
T 27 37 4T 57 6T
7T 8T 97 IOT IIT
(0)
c(1)
c(t-AT).
c(2T-4T)
C(T-AT)
T
2T 37 4T 57 6T
(b)
c(t).
c*(t-AT)
ז7
8T
97 IOT
IIT
T 27 3T 4T 5T 6T 77
8T 9T IOT IIT
(c)
Fig. 4-24 Samples of delayed time functions. (a) c(t) and c*(t);
or c*(t − AT), (m = 1, ▲ = 0). (b) c(t) and c*(t − AT) when
m1 and ▲ 0. (c) c(t) and c* (t − ▲T) when_m = 0 or ▲ = 1.
-

92
Chap.
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
C(z, m)
=
ΣcnT
Σ c(nT-AT) ≈¯
72=0
00
-n
= 2¯¹ Σ c[(n + m)T]z¯”
n=0
(4-177)
C(z, m) is defined as the modified z-transform of c(t) and is denoted
by 3m[c(t)]. Therefore,
3m[c(t)] = modified z-transform of c(t)
=z-transform of c(t - AT)
= z¯'Z[c(t + mT)]
(4-178)
When the value of m (or A) is varied from zero to unity, the ficti-
tious sampler of the system given in Fig. 4-23b provides values of
c(t) at virtually all times. This process is illustrated in Fig. 4-24.
Note that, when m = 1 (A = 0), the modified z-transform should
revert to the ordinary z-transform, and therefore, we can write
C(z, 1) = C(z)
(4-179)
However, Eq. (4-179) is valid only if the response c(t) does not have
any jump discontinuity at t=0. When m = 0 (A = 1), the function
c(t) is delayed by one sampling period T. Thus
1
-n
C(x, 0) = 2¹ Σc(nT) x¯" = z¯¹C(x)
n=0
(4-180)
The following example illustrates how the modified z-transform
of a function g(t) may be determined by use of Eq. (4-173).
Example 4-17
Determine the modified z-transform of g(t) = e. As a first step we write
g(n + m)T = e−(n+m)T
The modified z-transform of g(t) is obtained from Eq. (4-173). Thus
00
G(z, m) = z ¯¹Σ e¯(n+m)Tz-n
n=0
Expanding G(z, m) in the last equation, we have
(4-181)
(4-182)
G(z, m) = z¹(e−mT + z¯¹e¯(m + 1) T + z−² e − (m + 2) T +
.)
(4-183)
which can also be put a closed form:
G(z, m)
2-¹e-mr
-MT
e
-
=
(4-184)
1-e-T-1 ≈-e
We see in this case that G(z, 1) #G(z) but G(≈, 0) = z¯¹G(z).
Modified z-Transform Defined Through Complex Convolution In the
preceding section the modified z-transform of a time function c(t)
is expressed as the summation of impulses which are samples of the

Sec. 4.8
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 93
delayed function c(t - AT). Also, the modified z-transfer function
G(z, m) of any linear system with impulse response g(t) is defined
as the summation of impulses that are samples of the delayed im-
pulse response g(t - AT). The modified z-transform may also be
defined by use of the complex convolution integral which we have
used in Chapter 2 to derive the ordinary z-transform. We recall that
the definition of the ordinary z-transform of c(t) may be written as
C(z) = L[c(t) × dr(t)]z=e™s
(4-185)
where (t) is a train of impulses each with unit area. In a similar
manner, the modified z-transform of c(t) is written as
C(z, A) = L[c(t − AT) × 8,(t)]z=e™s
where 0▲ < 1.
(4-186)
From the theory of complex convolution Eq. (4-186) can be ex-
pressed as
or
because
and
C(z, A) = {L[c(t − AT)] * £[dr(t)]}==eTs
-
C(z, A) = [e¯AT³ C(s) * Ar(s)]z=eTs
(4-187)
(4-188)
(4-189)
1
-T's
(4-190)
L[c(t − AT)] = e¯ATSC(s)
L[dr(t)] = Ar(s)
=
1
Therefore, the convolution integral reads
-
1
C(z, A) =
=[
1
rc+ joo
2π j =
Ic-joo
C(§) e¯
-
ATE
1
— T ( s − §)
αξ
-
z=et's
(4-191)
1
2
The integral above can be evaluated by integrating along the line
from cj∞ to c + j∞ and the semicircle of infinite radius located
either in the right half or the left half of the -plane. The possible
contours of integration are identical to those shown in Fig. 2-6. This
contour integration method will provide correct results for C(z, A)
only if the integration around the large semicircle of T, or T₂ is
zero. Since the contour in the right-half -plane encircles the poles
of 1/(1 − e¯T(-)) which are infinite in number, the integral of Eq.
(4-191) can best be evaluated by integrating along the closed con-
tour in the left-half plane, However, one difficulty is still encountered
here the term e-T has a pole at ∞ which means that there is
a pole on the contour of integration. To ensure that the integral
converges on the infinite semicircle in the left half of the plane,
a new parameter, m, must be introduced such that
-
A = 1.
-
m
(4-192)
Now replacing A by 1 m in Eq. (4-188), we can show that Eq.
(4-191) becomes

94
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
or
C(z, m) e-ST.
1 C+joo
= е
-ST
2πj Jc-jo C(§) emri 1
1
-
1
1
-T(8-E)
C(z, m) = e™" 21 § C(t)e™" ____nap de
2nj
1
-
de...rs (4-193)
(4-194)
since C() er vanishes on the infinite semicircle in the left half of
the plane. Applying the residue theorem, Eq. (4-194) is reduced to
1
C(z, m) = e-"Σ Residues of C(§) em ____ -- |...78
at the poles of C(§)
1
-
or
C(z,m)
C(z, m) = x-¹
= z¹
-1
Residues of C(§)
1
-
em
ez-1
})
(4-195)
(4-196)
at the poles of C(§)
If C(§) is a rational function with k simple poles, we may represent
C() as the quotient of two polynomials; thus
C(§) N(E)
=
D()
Equation (4-196) can now be written.
where
k
N(Sn)
C(x, m) = x¹ 2 D(S) I
2
n=
D'(Sn) = dD(§) |
de
and s, designates the poles of C(§).
1
(4-197)
-
emrs
ez-1
(4-198)
(4-199)
Still another alternate form of the modified z-transform can be
obtained by performing the contour integration in the right half of
the plane along the semicircle. The closed path encircles the
singularities of 1/(1 − e−T(-)). In this case, the notation need not be
changed from A to 1 m, since e-AT does not have poles on the
right-half -plane contour. Therefore, the modified z-transform of c(t)
given by Eq. (4-191) is now written as
-
1
1
C(z, A) = 2; $C(§) e˜^2-x-n dŝ……..n
-ATE
1
T(s−5) de
de
|z=eTs
(4-200)
Equation (4-200) is a valid representation of the modified z-transform
defined by Eq. (4-191) if the integration along the semicircle in the
right half of the έ-plane is convergent. Observe that in Eq. (4-200)
the pole of 1/(1 − e-T(-)) on the semicircle in the right half §-plane
is cancelled by the zero of e-T which is at +∞. This result implies
that the integral along the semicircle will converge as long as C(s)
satisfies the condition:
-
lim C(s) = 0
84∞
(4-201)

Sec. 4.8
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 95
In other words c(t) may possess a jump (but no impulse) at t = 0.t
Applying the residue theorem, we reduce the integral in Eq. (4-194) to
ΔΤΕ
C(z, A) = - Residues of C() e¯ATE.
-
-
1
at the poles of 1/1 — e¯T(-)¸
1
-
– T(s — §)
e
αξ
eTs
(4-202)
Since 1/1 e-(-) has simple poles at = s±jnws, Eq. (4-196) may
§
be written as
C(z, A) = -
-Ž
N(Sn)
N=-8
In Chap. 2 we saw that
N(Sn)/D' (Sn) = -1/T
(4-203)
=ets
(4-204)
Substitution of Eq. (4-204) into Eq. (4-203) yields
30
or
C*(x, ▲) = = Σ C(s + jnw;)e¯ª(s+mw,)r
T 1=1∞
00
C* (s, A) = = Σ C(s + jnw,)e¯A(s+mw,)r
n=-∞
Substituting A = 1 m into Eq. (4-206), we have
- -
00
T
(4-205)
(4-206)
C* (s, m) = — Σ C(s + jnw;)e¯(1−m)(s+jnw,}r
(4-207)
which may be regarded as an alternative form of the modified z
transform of c(t). In a later chapter we shall see that Eq. (4-207)
may be coveniently applied to the statistical analysis and design of
sampled-data systems.
The Inverse Modified z-Transform The major contribution of the
modified z-transform is that it gives information on the actual outputs
of linear sampled-data systems. The modified z-transform of c(t),
C(z, m), contains all the information of c(t) between sampling in-
stants. The process of the inverse modified z-transform is denoted
by 3', and may be effected by means of either the power series
expansion method or the inversion formula.
† Note that in the case of the z-transform formula given in Eq. (2-68), the time
function must not have any jump discontinuity at t=0. We have seen in Chapter
2 that if the time function has a jump at t = 0, the z-transform of the time function
c(t) evaluated by taking the contour integral around the right half of the -plane path
provides only one half of the value of c(0+). In the case of the modified z-transform,
Eq. (4-200) leads to the correct answer even if c(t) jumps at t O simply because the
time function is first shifted to the right by a period of AT, where ▲ is between 0
and 1; then the shifted function c(t - AT) is sampled by the fictitious sampler at the
regular sampling instants: 0, T, 2T, 3T, . . .. Therefore, unless ▲ = 0 or ▲ = 1, the
initial value of c(t), c(0+) is never sampled.
-

96
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
(a) The Power Series Method. In this method the actual output
response c(t) is obtained by expanding C(z, m) into a power series
in z by long division. Just as in the z-transformation, if C(z, m)
is written as a ratio of two polynomials in z as
1
C(x, m) =
ax(m)x+ax-1(m) xk-1 + ... a₁(m)z + a。
b₁(m)z³ + b;-1(m)x³-¹ + . . . b₁(m)x + b。
1
(4-208)
it can be expanded into a power series in z¹ by dividing the denomi-
nator into the numerator using long division. Therefore, Eq. (4-208)
is written as
C(z, m)
-
=
A(m)2+ B(m)zk-j-1 + . . .
-
(4-209)
Comparing Eq. (4-209) with Eq. (4-177), we see that the coefficient
A(m) corresponds to c(j - k + m − 1)T ; B(m) corresponds to
c( j − k + 1 + m − 1)T; etc. When m varies continuously between
zero and unity, the response c(t) at all times is given by the co-
efficients A(m), B(m),. . .. The details of the method are illustrated
by the following examples.
Example 4-18
The time function g(t) = e' given in Example 4-17 is to be reconstructed
from its modified z-transform by use of the power series expansion method.
The modified z-transform of g(t) is given by Eq. (4-184).
-MT
G(z, m)
e
=
Dividing the denominator into the numerator yields
G(z, m)
=
e-mrz-1+ e − (m + 1) Tz − 2 + e −(m+2) T~~3
+ .. - (m + n)T z − (n + 1) +
e
...
(4-210)
(4-211)
The time function g(t) during the first sampling period is given by the co-
efficient e-mr of the z-1 term in Eq. (4-211). When m = 0 (A = 1), the value
of g(t) at t = 0 is obtained; and when m = 1 (A = 0), g(T-) is obtained.
The values of n and m prescribed for the beginning and the end of each
succeeding sampling period are tabulated as follows:
1st sampling period:
n 1, m = 0, _g(0*) = g(T,0) = e-mr|m=0
= 1
n = 1, m = 1, g(T) = g(T, 1) = e¯mT |m=1 = e¯T
2nd sampling period:
= 2, m =
n
n =
2, m =
0, g(T) = g(2T, 0)
1, g(2T-) = g(2T, 1)
=
e-(m+1)T |
m=0
=
e-r
= e−(m+1)T | m=1 = e−27

Sec. 4.8
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 97
nth sampling period:
n = n,
n = n,
m =
m =
= e¯(n−1)T
0, g[(n − 1)T*] = g(nT,0) = e− (m+n−1)T | m=0
= 1, g(nT¯) = g(nT, 1) = e− (m+n−1)T | m+1 = e¯nr
The response between any two consecutive sampling instants is determined
by assigning values for m continuously from zero to unity. The total time
function g(nT, m) which is the inverse modified z-transform of G(z, m) is
shown in Fig. 4-25.
g(t)
e-mT
m=0
1
e-(m+1)T
g(nT, m)
e-(m+2)T
O
m=1
m=0
m=1
m=0
m=1
m=0
T
27
3T
4T
5T
Fig. 4-25 Inverse modified z-transform of G(z, m)
Example 4-19
e-mr
z-
The sampled-data system shown in Fig. 4-14 is to be analyzed by the
modified z-transform method. The output response of the system shown in
Fig. 4-16 is obtained by means of the submultiple-sampling method in Example
4-15. A block diagram of the system with the fictitious time delay for the
application of the modified z-transform is depicted in Fig. 4-26.
From Example 4-18 the modified z-transform of the system transfer func-
tion is obtained as
mT
G(z, m)
=
༤
e
(4-212)
The modified z-transform of the output response is given by Eq. (4-176).
C(z, m) = E(z)G(z, m)
and for a unit-step function input C(z, m) becomes
-mT
C(z, m)
e
=
-
2 1 z e
(4-213)
(4-214)
Expanding Eq. (4-214) by long division yields the following power series:
C(z, m)
T
= e-mT-1 + e-mT (1 + e¯T) x² + e¯mr(1 + e¯" + e-2T)x-3
е
+
•
•
+e-mr
-nT
-
+
(4-215)
The output responses c(t) at the beginning and the end of various sampling
periods are tabulated as follows:
1st sampling period:
n = 1, m = 0,
е
c(0) = e¯mT | m
m=0=
: 1
n =
1, m = 1,
c(T) = e¯mT |m=1 = e¯r

98
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
e*(t)
_e(t) X ²(1) G(s) = + + +
1
-
AT=(1-m)T
s+1
Fictitious delay
Fictitious sampler
C(z, m)
c(nT, m)
c(t)
Fig. 4-26 Open-loop sampled-data system with fictitious delay to
evaluate response between sampling instants by the modified z-
transform method.
2nd sampling period:
n = 2, m = 0,
c(T+) = e¯mr(1 + e¯7)|m=0 = 1 + e-T
n = 2, m = 1,
c(2T¯) = e¯mr(1 + e¯T)|m=1 = e¯T(1 + e¯T)
nth sampling period:
n = n, m = 0, c(n - 1)T+
=e-mr
1 -e
1 -e
m=0
n = n,
m = 1, c(nT-) = e
-mr1
-e
nT
-
m=1
=
=
1 - e-nr
1 — e-T
-
1 e-T
The output response c(t) between any two consecutive sampling instants
is determined by assigning values of m continuously from zero to unity. For
instance, the response during the first sampling period is obtained from e-mr
when m is varied from zero to unity. The response during the second sampling
period is obtained from e-mr(1 + e-7) when m is varied from zero to unity.
The output response c(t) thus obtained is sketched in Fig. 4-27.
The Inversion Formula Method Like the z-transform method, the
inverse modified z-transform can also be obtained by means of the
inversion integral
c(t)
e-mT (1+e-T)
e-mT(1+e-T+e-27)
c(nT, m)
m=0
m=0
1
m=0
e-m
www
m=1
m=1
m=1
о
T
27 37 4T 5T 6T
77
Fig. 4-27 Output response obtained by the modified z-transform
method for the sampled-data system of Fig. 4-26.

Sec. 4.9
99
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
1
c(nT, m)
=
2nj
§, C(z, m) z"-¹ dz
n-1
(4-216)
where I is a closed path in the z-plane that encloses all the singu-
larities of C(z, m)2"-¹. We can show that when m = 1, the inversion
integral for the modified z-transform reverts to that of the z-trans-
form. During the sampling period between t = (n − 1)T and t = nT,
-
the value of c(n − 1)T+ is obtained from c(nT, m) by assigning
zero value for m; the value of c(nT-) is obtained by substituting
m = 1 in c(nT, m).
Example 4-20
The same system given in Example 4-19 is analyzed by use of the in-
version formula for modified z-transform.
Substituting the expression of C(z, m) from Eq. (4-214) into Eq. (4-216),
we have
c(nT, m) =
1
2 xj f
ལྤ
e
-mT
e
1 ལྤ — ཏཾཆ*-1
dz
(4-217)
where I may be a circle in the z-plane centered at the origin; the circle
should be large enough to enclose the poles of the integrand of Eq. (4-217)
1 and z = e. Applying the residue theorem to Eq. (4-217) yields
at x=
c(nT, m) = em:
Σ Residues of
2*
—
(≈ − 1) (≈ − e−¹)
at the poles z = 1, z= e-".
-e
Equation (4-218) can be further reduced to
(4-218)
c(nT, m) = e
-mT
(글
​1
----
e
nT
e
(4-219)
We see that this result agrees with that obtained in Example 4-19.
4.9 THEOREM of the modIFIED Z-TRANSFORMS
Several basic theorems similar to the z-transforms may simplify
and facilitate the application of the modified z-transform method to
the studies of sampled-data systems. The derivations and applications
of some of these theorems are as follows:
1. Real Translation If the modified z-transform of the time func-
tion e(t) is E(z, m), then
3m e(t±nT) = z¹¹E(z, m)
(4-220)
where n is an integer. This theorem is actually the same as the
delayed z-transform discussed in Sec. 4.8 where the delayed z-trans-
form is given by Eq. (4-161). Therefore, no additional proof is
necessary here.

100
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
2. Complex Translation The complex translation theorem states
that if c(t) has the modified 2-transform E(z, m), then
Zm[eate(t)] = Zm[E(s ± a)] = e‡ªÃ(m−¹E(ze±ªT, m) (4-221)
Proof: By definition
3m[eate(t)] = 3mE(s± a)
=
=
L[e Fa(t) e(t - ▲T)Ɛr(t)]s=(1/T) în z
-
L Ze p = a(nт-27) e(nT — \T)8(t − nT)].-(1/1)inz
n=0
Since A 1 m, Eq. (4-222) becomes.
=
3m[eate(t)] = £[e
FamT
or
00
770
(4-222)
„a(nr-¹e(nT + mT − T) 8(t − nT)]..
00
-
-
3m[eate(t)] = eamπ z e +anTe[(n + m)T]z™"
n=0
S=(1, T) inz
(4-223)
(4-224)
Multiplication of the right-hand side of Eq. (4-224) by ear etar yields
00
3m[eate(t)] = e e e
FaT taTamT - 1
2
Σ e[(n + m)T](ze±ar)-n
(4-225)
n0
which is then reduced to the following form:
3m[eate(t)] =
Therefore,
00
= eFar(m−¹) ( ze±ar) -¹ Σ e[(n + m)T](ze±ª¹)-n (4-226)
720
3m[eate(t)] = 3m[E(s ± a)] = e+ar(m −1) E( ze±ar¸
Example 4-21
m) (4-227)
Given e(t) and E(s) as e(t) = t and E(s) = 1/s², respectively, evaluate
the modified z-transform of e¯ale(t).
By use of the complex translation theorem stated in Eq. (4–221),
3m[te-at] = 3m[
1
(s + a)²
2
=e¯ar(m-1) E(zeªr, m)
(4-228)
From Appendix A, the modified z-transform of e(t) is found as
3m (1) = 3m (12)
hence
3m(t) = 3m (32) = [
Equation (4-230) is simplified to
mT
Zear
(z
--
mT
+
༣ 1
T
1)2
(4-229)
T
+
1
(zear
1)³] e-ar(m-1)
(4-230)
3m(t) = 3m (12)
Te-amr(e-ar
-
me-ar
+2)
=
S
༤
e-ar)?
(4-231)
A check on the modified z-transform table in Appendix A shows that this is
the correct answer for the modified z-transform of e-att.

Sec. 4.9
101
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
3. Initial Value Theorem The initial value theorem states that if
the time function e(t) has the modified z-transform E(z, m), the
initial value of e(t) may be determined by the following relation:
lim e(nT, m) = lim zE(z, m)
lim e(t)
=
n-0
m=0
28400
(4-232)
7-.0*
if the limit exists.
m=0
Proof: The proof of this theorem actually follows directly from
the initial value theorem for the ordinary z-transforms. By definition
the modified z-transform of e(t) is
-1
00
E(z, m) = x¯¹ Σ e(n + m)Tz
n=0
-n
(4-233)
Multiplying both sides of the last equation by z and taking the
limit as m approaches zero, we have
∞
lim z E(z, m) = Σ c(nT) z¯¹
m=0
7=0
(4-234)
which is recognized as the orginary z-transform of e(t). Therefore,
from Eq. (4-85), the relation given in Eq. (4-232) is obtained.
Example 4-22
To illustrate the application of the initial value theorem for modified z-
transforms, the initial value of the time response of the system in Example
4-18 will be determined. In Example 4-18 the modified z-transform of the
system impulse response g(t) is
-m T
e
G(z, m)
=
2 -e
The value of g(t) at t =
-
0 is given by Eq. (4-232) as
-MT
lim g(t)
=
lim zG(z, m)
ze
=
L-.0*
lim
m=0 2
1
(4-235)
(4-236)
m-0
2 - 00
2-00
In a similar manner, the initial value of the system output c(t) in Example
4-19 is obtained by use of Eq. (4-232). Thus
lim c(t)
t0*
m = 0
lim z
c
༤
e-mr
1
-
1
༤
2100
(4-237)
4. Final Value Theorem
The final value theorem for the modified
z-transform states that if the time function e(t) has the modified
z-transform E(z, m) and if the function [(z - 1)/2]E(z, m) possesses
no poles on or outside of the unit circle in the z-plane, then
-
lim e(nT, m)
=
71-∞0
2-1
Z
lim (≈ = 1) E(x, m)
(4-238)
Proof: The proof of this theorem can be effected in much the

102
Chap. 4
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY
same way as that of the final value theorem for the ordinary z-
transforms. Therefore, it is left as an exercise at the end of this
chapter.
The final value theorems for the z-transforms and the modified
z-transforms normally will give identical results to the final value of
a time function c(t) if there are no ripples or hidden oscillations
between sampling instants in e(t). In general, if ripples between
sampling instants or discontinuities at the sampling instants exist,
the z-transform method is inadequate and usually will bring misleading
results. The final value theorem stated in Sec. 4.5 by Eq. (4-88)
could conceivably give the final value of e(t) only at the sampling
instants. However, if the final value theorem for the modified z-
transform is used where hidden oscillation exists, the final value of
e(t), represented by
lim e(t)
=
lim e(nT, m)
1400
n→00
(4-239)
will be a function of m; and as the value of m is varied from 0 to
1 (inclusive), the final value of e(t) during one sampling period is
determined.
Example 4-23
The final values of the time response of the systems in Examples 4-18
and 4-19 are evaluated by use of Eq. (4-238). From Fig. 4-25 we see that
the inverse modified z-transform of G(z, m) = e¯mr/(x − e−7) does not possess
any ripple or discontinuity between or at the sampling instants. Therefore,
we should expect that Eqs. (4-88) and (4-238) will both provide identical
results for g(t) as t tends to infinity. Using Eq. (4-238), we have
-mT
lim g(t) = lim g(nT, m)
= lim (² = 1)( -_-,) =
2 1
!→00
Z
e
= = 0 (4-240)
We can easily see that Eq. (4-88) will give the same result as Eq. (4-240).
From Fig. 4-27 we see that the system output response of the system in
Example 4-19 has discontinuities at the sampling instants. It has been shown
previously that the final value of c(t) is between 0.585 and 1.585. In the
steady state c(t) jumps from 0.585 to 1.585 at the sampling instants. There-
fore, it is essential that the final value theorem for the modified z-transforms
be used in this case. From Eq. (4-238), the final value of c(t) is
lim c(t) = lim c(nT, m) = lim (≈ — ¹)(,~ ~ 1)(~
∞ - 7
200
=
2-1
0 AM 1
e
1
mT
e-T
z
mT
(4-241)
and is a function of m. The fact that the final value of c(t) is a function of
m is an indication that ripples or hidden oscillations exist between sampling
instants in c(t). It is easy to see that by assigning values for m from 0 to
unity in Eq. (4-241), the steady state response of c(t) during one sampling
period is obtained.

Sec. 4.9
THE Z-TRANSFORM THEORY 103
REFERENCES
Barker, R. H., "The Pulse Transfer Function and Its Application to Sampling
Servo Systems," Proc. I. E. E., London 99, Part 4, December 1952, pp. 302-317.
Helm, H. A., "The Z-Transformation," Bell System Technical Journal, 38,
January 1959, pp. 177-196.
Jury, E. I., "Synthesis and Critical Study of Sampled-Data Control Systems,"
Trans. A. I. E. E., 75, Part 2, 1956, pp. 141-151.
Jury, E. I., "Additions to the Modified z-Transform Method," I. R. E. WESCON
Convention Record, Part 4, 1957, pp. 136-156.
Jury, E. I., and Farmanfarma, "Table of z-Transforms and Modified z-Trans-
forms of Various Sampled-Data Systems Configurations," Univ. of California,
Berkeley. Electronics Research Lab., Report 136A, Ser. 60, 1955.
Lago, G. V., "Additions to z-transformation Theory for Sampled-Data System,"
Trans. A. I. E. E., 74, Part 2, January 1955, pp. 403–407.
Lago, G. V., "Additions to Sampled-Data Theory," Proc. National Electronics
Conference, 10, 1954, pp. 758-766.
Papoulis, A., "A New Method of Analysis of Sampled-Data Systems," I. R. E.
Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-4, November 1959, pp. 67-73.
Pastel, M. P., and Thaler, G. J., “Sampled-Data Design by Log Gain Diagrams,"
I.R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-4, November 1959, pp. 192–197.
Ragazzini, J. R., and Zadah, L. H., "The Analysis of Sampled-Data Systems,"
Trans. A. I. E. E., 71, Part 2, 1952, pp. 225-234.
Truxal, J. G., Automatic Feedback Control System Synthesis, Chapter 9, New
York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1955.

5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL
FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX
REPRESENTATION OF
SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
5.1 BLOCK DIAGRAM ANALYSIS AND TRANSFER
FUNCTIONS OF CLOSED-LOOP SAMPLED-DATA
SYSTEMS
In the preceding chapter the block diagrams of simple open-loop
systems with sampled-data have been shown, and they are analyzed
by means of the z-transform method. We have seen that when the
sampling operation is represented by a sampling switch (or an
impulse modulator), the block diagram concept, used so effectively
in the analysis of continuous-data systems, can also be adapted to
the studies and analysis of sampled-data systems.
In short, a block diagram is simply a graphic shorthand notation
representing the interaction between elements of a physical system.
Like the block diagrams that lead to the transfer functions or output
transforms of continuous signal systems, the transfer functions or
output transforms for sampled-data systems can also be evaluated
with the help of block diagram algebra. Furthermore, for sampled-
data systems the process of transfer function evaluation may be
effected in either the s- or the z-domain; the transfer function, for
instance, may be represented by either the pulse transfer function
G*(s) or the z-transfer function G(z).
104

Sec. 5.1 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION 105
Transfer Functions and Output Response of Open-Loop Systems
With Cascaded Elements
For open-loop systems with cascaded elements, the case where
synchronized samplers exist between elements must be distinguished
from the case where the elements are connected directly together.
For instance, the two systems shown in Fig. 5-la and Fig. 5-1b be-
Fictitious
sampler
c(1)
T C*(s)
e(t) e*(1)
C(z)
G,(s)
G₂(5)
c(t)
C(s)
Synchronized
samplers
(a)
Fictitious
c*(1)
sampler
C*(s)
C(z)
c(t)
C(s)
e(t)
e*(1)
G₁(s)
G₂(s)
(b)
Fig. 5-1 Open-loop sampled-data systems with cascaded elements.
(a) Cascaded elements with sampler in between elements. (b)
Cascaded elements connected directly together.
have in entirely different ways and thus need separate treatment.
In Sec. 4-6 we have seen that the Laplace transform, the pulse
transform, and the z-transform of the output response of the system
in Fig. 5-1a are respectively
and
G*
C(s) Gr(s) G₂(s) E* (s)
=
C*(s) = G*(s)G*(s) E*(s)
C(z) = G₁(2)G₂(z)E(z)
(5-1)
(5-2)
(5-3)
From Eqs. (5-2) and (5-3) the pulse transfer function of the open-
loop system is simply
C*(s)
E* (s)
=
G*(s)G* (s)
and the z-transform of Eq. (5-4) is
C(z)
= G₁(2)G₂(2)
E(z)
(5-4)
(5-5)
Therefore, for cascaded elements with synchronized samplers between

106 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
Chap. 5
all elements, the over-all pulse-(or z-) transfer function of the open-
loop system is generally equal to the product of the pulse-(or z-)
transfer functions of the individual elements. This is not the case
for the system shown in Fig. 5-1b. The transfer functions derived
in Sec. 4-6 show that the Laplace transform of the continuous
output signal is
C(s) = G₁(s)G₂(s)E* (s)
(5-6)
The pulse transform of c(t) or the Laplace transform of c*(t) is
given by
=
C*(s) GG (s) E*(s)
G₁G*(s)E*(s)
where G₁G*(s) is defined as
G,G: (s) = G:G† (s) = = Σ G₁(s + jnw.)G₂(s + jnw,)
(5-7)
T
N = ∞
and the z-transform of c(t) is
(5-8)
(5-9)
C(z) G.G₂(z)E(z)
=
where G.G₂(z) denotes the z-transform of G₁G*(s) or G₁(s)G₂(s).
Closed-Loop Sampled-Data Systems
The derivation of transfer functions and output response trans-
forms of closed-loop sampled-data systems follows the same method
as that used for the open-loop systems. Because of possible variations
in the location of the sampler, the transfer function for even a
simple single-loop system with sampled-data, unlike that of a
continuous-data system, depends entirely on where the sampler (or
samplers) is (are) located. A single-loop sampled-data system with
error-sampling is shown in Fig. 5-2. The transfer function of the
system and the output response transform are derived as follows:
From the definition of the Laplace transform, the transform of
c(t) is
Fictitious
sampler
c*(t)
T C*(s)
r(t)
R(s)+
e(1)
e*(t)
G(s)
E(s)
† E*(s)
c(1)
C(s)
H(s)
Fig. 5-2 Closed-loop sampled-data system.

Sec. 5.1 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION 107
C(s) = G(s)E*(s)
The Laplace transform of the continuous error signal e(t) is
E(s) = R(s) C(s)H(s)
–
Substituting C(s) in Eq. (5-10) into Eq. (5-11) yields
E(s) = R(s) − H(s)G(s)E*(s)
Taking the pulse transform of Eq. (5-12) yields
10
ΟΙ
E*(s) = R*(s) – [H(s)G(s)E*(s)]*
-
E*(s) = R*(s) – [H(s)G(s)]*E*(s)
= R*(s) - HG*(s)E*(s)
(5-10)
(5-11)
(5-12)
(5-13)
(5-14)
Solving for E*(s) in Eq. (5-14), we have the pulse transform
of e(t)
E*(s)
=
R*(s)
1+ HG*(s)
(5-15)
The Laplace transform of the continuous output response is obtained
by substituting E*(s) from Eq. (5-15) into Eq. (5-10). Hence
C(s)
=
G(s) R*(s)
1+ HG*(s)
(5-16)
The pulse transform of c(t) or the Laplace transform of c*(t) is
obtained by taking the pulse transform of Eq. (5-16), thus
C*(s) = G*(s)E*(s)
=
G*(s)
1+ HG*(s)
R*(s)
(5-17)
The z-transform of c(t) is obtained from the last equation simply
by changing variables of s =
T
Inz yielding
C(z)
=
R(2)
G(z)
1 + HG(2)
(5-18)
As another example of the derivation of the closed-loop transfer
function of a sampled-data system, consider the system shown in
Fictitious sampler
c*(t)
T C*(s)
C(z)
r(t)
e(t)
G(s)
R(s)
E(s)
c(t)
C(s)
c(1)
H(s)
Cs)
Fig. 5-3 Closed-loop sampled-data system.

108
Chap.
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
Fig. 5-3. In this system the output signal c(t) is sampled by a
sampler, and the sampled signal is fed back through the element
H(s) to the input. The signal at the output of H(s) is continuous
with respect to time. The output transforms: C(s), C*(s), and C(z)
are derived as follows. In this case, a so-called transfer function for
the closed-loop system cannot be derived because the reference input
R is combined with the transfer function G(s) of the forward path.
The Laplace transform of c(t) is
C(s)
=
E(s)G(s)
and the Laplace transform of the error signal e(t) is
E(s) = R(s)H(s) C*(s)
(5-19)
(5-20)
(5-21)
(5-22)
Substituting Eq. (5-20) into Eq. (5-19) yields
C(s) = R(s)G(s) – G(s)H(s)C*(s)
Taking the pulse transform on both sides of Eq. (5-21) yields
C*(s) = GR* (s) − HG*(s)C*(s)
where
GR*(s) = RG* (s)
(5-23)
= [G(s)R(s)]*
Solving for C*(s) from Eq. (5-22), we have
C*(s) =
GR*(s)
1+ HG*(s)
(5-24)
which is the pulse transform of c(t). We see that the pulse transfer
function in the form C*(s)/R*(s) cannot be obtained in this case,
since GR* (s) should be considered as one single expression. In order
to obtain the continuous output C(s), we substitute C*(s) into Eq.
(5-21). Therefore,
=
C(s) G(s) R(s)
-
H(s)GR* (s)
G(s)
1 + HG* (s)
From Eq. (5-24) the z-transform of c(t) is obtained as
C(z)
=
GR(2)
1+ HG(z)
(5-25)
(5-26)
Since GR(2) denotes the z-transform of G(s)R(s), the z-transfer
function C(2)/R(z) cannot be obtained for this system.
In a similar manner, the output transforms or transfer functions
(if they exist) for some simple sampled-data system configurations
are derived and are shown in Table 5-1, which is printed on the
inside of the front and back cover. (In Table 5-1, the same results
are also obtained by use of the signal flow graph method.)

Sec. 5.1
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION 109
Output Transforms of More Complex System Configurations
In general, the labor involved in the derivation of the output
transforms of sampled-data systems increases with the increase in
complexity of the systems configurations. Unfortunately, the block
diagram reduction technique devised for continuous feedback control
systems cannot be efficiently applied to sampled-data systems simply
because of the mixing of sampled and continuous signals in the
latter. A simple example will illustrate this difficulty. In Fig. 5-4a
two parallel paths are shown that may be thought of as part of the
block diagram of a continuous-data system. We know that the two
paths can be combined and reduced to a single block as shown in
Fig. 5-4b. However, the two channels of the block diagram shown
in Fig. 5-5 cannot be combined into one, since one path has sampled
data and the other has a continuous signal.
As an illustration of the derivation of the output transforms of
sampled-data systems with complex configurations, let us consider
the block diagram shown in Fig. 5-6. With any experience in the
G₁(s)
E(s)
C(s)
E(s)
C(s)
G₁(s) + G₂(s)
G₂(s)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5-4 Parallel paths with continuous data.
E*(s) G(s)
E(s)
+
C(s)
+
E(s)
G₂(s)
Fig. 5-5 Parallel paths with continuous and sampled data.
E*(s)
D*(s)
G,(s)
Fictitious
sampler
C(s)
Synchronized
samplers
C(z)
c*(1)
R(s)
G₂(s)
E(s)
E(s)
c(1)
C(s)
Fig. 5-6 Block diagram of closed-loop sampled-data system.

110 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
Chap. 5
manipulation of block diagrams one will intuitively write down the
following two equations directly from the system configuration:
The Laplace transform of the continuous output is
C(s) = G₂(s)E(s)'+ G₁(s)G2(s)D*(s)E*(s)
and the Laplace transform of the continuous error signal is
E(s) = R(s) - C(s)
(5-27)
(5-28)
However, from here on the next step seems to be uncertain. We
see that there are at least two alternatives: one is to take the pulse
transform of both sides of Eq. (5-27); the other is to take the pulse
transform of both sides of Eq. (5-28) first. A closer look reveals
that since E(s) and E*(s) are eventually to be eliminated from Eq.
(5-27), the pulse transform of C(s) should not be taken at this
stage, since taking it will make the first term on the right hand
side of Eq. (5-27) read G₂E*(s) and then E*(s) could not be
eliminated from Eq. (5-27). Therefore, the logical step is to take
the pulse transform of E(s) in Eq. (5-28) and then substitute the
resulting equation into Eq. (5-27). We have,
E*(s) = R*(s) – C*(s)
Substitution of Eq. (5-29) into Eq. (5-27) yields
C(s) = G₂(s)R(s) — G₂(s)C(s)
Solving for C(s) yields
-
+ G₁(s)G₂(s)D*(s)[R*(s) – C*(s)]
(5-29)
(5-30)
C(s)
=
G₂(s)
1 + G₂(s)
R(s)
+
G₂(s)
1+ G₂(s)
G₁(s)D*(s)[R*(s) − C*(s)]
-
(5-31)
Now taking the pulse transform on both sides of Eq. (5-31), we
have
C*(s) = [j
G
+ G₂(s)
G₁(3) R(3) ]*
+
[G₂ (s)G₁(s)] *D*(s) [R* (s) − C*(s)]
1+ G₂(s).
Solving for C*(s) in the last equation yields
1 + G₂(s)
[G₂(s)G,(s) *D*(s)R*(s)
[G₂(s) R(s) *
+
1+ G(s).
C*(s) =
1 +
G₂(s)G₁(s)
1 + G₂(s) ]* D*(s)
(5-32)
(5-33)

Sec. 5.1
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION 111
The Laplace transform of c(t) is obtained by substituting C*(s)
from Eq. (5-33) into Eq. (5-31). After simplification, C(s) reads
C(s)
=
G₂(s)
1 + G₂(s)
R(s)
+
G₂(s)G₁(s) D*(s)
1+ G₂(s)
R* (s) -
´G₂(s)R(s)
1+ G₂(s)
1 +
G₂(s)G₁(s)
1+ G₁(s) ]*D*(s)
(5-34)
This expression for C(s) can be simplified still further if the term:
G₂(s)R(s)
R* (s) − [G₂(5) R(s)]*
-
1+
is written in an equivalent form. Taking the inverse transform of
the last term, we have
R(s) -
=
G₂(s)R(s) R(s)
1+ G₂(s) 1+ G₂(s)
(5-35)
Substitution of the pulse transform of R(s)/[1 + G₂(s) into Eq.
(5-34) yields
C(s)
=
G₂(s)R(s)
1+ G₂(s)
+
G₂(s) G₁(s)
1+ G₂(s)
D*(s)
R(s)
1+ G₂(s)
(5-36)
1 +
G₂(s)G₁(s)
1+ G₂(s) ]* D*(s)
From the examples given above, we see that because the simul-
taneous equations of a sampled-data system contain both sampled
and unsampled forms of the same variable, an analytic solution of
the equations is quite difficult to obtain. In general, no definite rule
exists that will lead to the optimum procedure of taking the pulse
transform and making proper substitution of variables. Even an
experienced analyst might find himself enmeshed in a confusion of
tedious algebraic manipulation. In the following section the signal
flow graph technique of solving sampled-data systems problems is
introduced. As we shall see, when the signal flow graph of a sampled-
data system is constructed, the output transforms (or the transforms
of any system variable) as a function of the input signal can vir-
tually be written by mere inspection from the signal flow graph.

112
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
5.2 SIGNAL FLOW GRAPHS OF SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
We have seen that system transfer functions of continuous-data
systems can be derived from either the signal flow graph or the
block diagram simply by use of Mason's gain formula. Now we shall
investigate how the signal flow graph technique can be extended to
the analysis and portrayal of systems with sampled-data. However,
any attempt to apply Mason's gain formula directly to the block
diagram or equivalent signal flow graph of a system with sampled-data
will encounter immediate difficulty. As is evident, the main difficulty
stems from the fact that sampling switches exist in sampled-data
systems; since we cannot replace the samplers by their equivalent
transfer functions, the conventional signal flow graph algebra simply
does not know how to handle a flow graph with sampling switches.
In a special case, if all the signals in a sampled-data system are
sampled, then all the transferred quantities of the systems are
starred and the general gain formula can still be applied directly.
For instance, let us consider the sampled-data system shown in Fig.
5-7. The signal flow graph of the system is constructed in Fig. 5-8.
Since only sampled signals exist throughout the system, the sampling
switches are omitted from the signal flow graph. Now applying the
gain formula to the signal flow graph with only sampled variables,
the closed-loop transfer function of the system is obtained as
R*
RA
Ε
C
G*(s)
H*(s)
Fig. 5-7 An all-sampled-data system.
G*
Fig. 5-8 Equivalent signal flow graph of the sampled-data system
shown in Fig. 5-7.
† R. Ash, W. H. Kim, and G. M. Kranc, "A General Flow Graph Technique for
the Solution of Multiloop Sampled Systems," Trans. of A. S. M. E., Journal of Basic
Engineering, June 1960, pp. 360–370.
J. M. Salzer, "Signal Flow Reductions in Sampled Data Systems," I. R. E., WESCON
Convention Record, Part 4, 1957, pp. 166-170.
G. G. Lendaris and E. I. Jury, “Input-Output Relationships for Multiple Sampled-
Loop Systems," A. I. E. E., Trans., Paper No. 59-882.

Sec. 5.2 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION 113
C*(s)
R*(s)
=
G*(s)
1+G*(s)H*(s)
(5-37)
We can conclude now that Mason's gain formula can be applied
only to signal flow graphs (or block diagrams) that contain nodes
either representing all continuous signals or all sampled signals but
not mixed signals.
However, the majority of the sampled-data systems contain both
sampled and continuous signals; therefore, the samplers cannot be
omitted simply. A signal flow graph method must be devised to
take care of systems with sampled as well as continuous data.
Next, we shall introduce a method of determining the output
transforms (or transfer functions) of sampled-data systems by use
of Mason's gain formula. The method involves the following steps:
(1) With the system block diagram as the starting point, construct
the "original signal flow graph" of the system. The original flow
graph is defined as merely the equivalent flow graph of the system
block diagram. For instance, Fig. 5-8 gives the original flow graph
of the block diagram shown in Fig. 5-7; the original flow graph of
the system in Fig. 5-2 is drawn in Fig. 5-9.
1
R
X₁ = E
X2
G
X3=C
-H
Fig. 5-9 Original signal flow graph of the system in Fig. 5-2.
(2) The second step involves the construction of the "sampled
signal flow graph" from information obtained from the original
signal flow graph. This step needs some careful discussion. Let us
consider the flow graph shown in Fig. 5-9. Note that the flow graph
still contains the sampling switch so that the gain formula cannot
be applied directly. However, the following set of equations is
written from the flow graph:
X₁ = ER-HX3
X₂ = E* X*
X2
=
X₁ = C = GX2
(5-38)
(5-39)
(5-40)
where for simplicity E*(s) is denoted by E*, R(s) by R, H(s) by
H and G(s) by G. X1, X2, and X, are Laplace transforms of flow
graph variables at nodes 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Substituting Eq.
(5-39) into Eq. (5-40), and then substituting Eq. (5-40) into Eq.
(5-38), we have the following equations:
X₁ = HGX* + R
-
-
(5-41)

114
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
X₂ = X*
X2
(5-42)
X3
X₁ = GX* =
= GX2
(5-43)
=
Careful examination of Eqs. (5-41), (5-42), and (5-43) reveals that
the same equations can be obtained if the sampler in the original
flow graph of Fig. 5-9 is deleted and if an artificial signal source
of signal strength X, X = E* is applied at node X2, the output
node of the sampler. (Now the system flow graph has two separate
inputs.) If now we take the pulse transform on both sides of Eqs.
(5-41) through (5-43), we have
X* = − (HG)*X* + R*
-
X* = X*
X* = G*X*
(5-44)
(5-45)
(5-46)
Since the last three equations contain only sampled variables, the
signal flow graph constructed from these equations is called the
sampled signal flow graph of the system in Fig. 5-2 and is shown
in Fig. 5-10. Note that the sampled flow graph has only the sampled
variables: R*, X*, X*, X* and C*.
-(HG)
Q
X2
Fig. 5-10 Sampled flow graph of the system in Fig. 5-2.
Now we can apply Mason's gain formula directly to the sampled
flow graph shown in Fig. 5-10 for the evaluation of the sampled
output C*(s) or C(z). Once the sampled flow graph is drawn, all
other dependent variables X, E*, and X* (in this case, X = E*
= X) can also be expressed as functions of the input R* by use
of the gain formula. Therefore, from Fig. 5-10
C*(s)
=
G*(s)
1+ HG*(s)
R* (s)
1
and
E*(s)
=
HG* (5) R* (s)
where HG*(s) = (HG)*.
1 + HG*(s)
(5-47)
(5-48)
In general, if a multiloop sampled-data system contains several
samplers (synchronized), then by deleting the samplers and adding
artificial signal sources at the corresponding output nodes of the
samplers, a set of equations similar to that of Eqs. (5-41) through
(5-43) can be written. For instance, if the node variables of the

Sec. 5.2 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
115
original flow graph are represented by Xn (n = 0, 1, 2, . . .), then
the following equation may be written for the variable X, at node j:
X₁ = Σ a₁‚X+ +
Σ
k
bkjRk
(5-49)
where it is assumed that a sampler is located between node i and
node j and that signal is transmitted from node i to node j; therefore,
X is the sampled signal which flows to node j from the sampler
following node i. a represents the transmission between node i and
node j; b denotes the transmission from node k to node j; R is
the signal applied at node k which flows to node j. Taking the
pulse transform on both sides of Eq. (5-49) yields
X; = Σ ai,X† + Σ (bxjRk)*
k
where all the variables are now in sampled form.
(5-50)
This step can generally be omitted in writing Eq. (5-49). Once
the samplers in the original flow graph are replaced by corresponding
input signals, Eq. (5-50) can be written directly from the flow
graph by applying Mason's gain formula and taking the pulse trans-
form of the variables at the same time. For instance, Eqs. (5-44)
through (5-46) can be written directly from Fig. 5-9 by applying
the gain formula and taking the pulse transform at nodes X1, X2,
and X, simultaneously.
(3) In the previous step we have demonstrated how the sampled
variables of a sampled-data system can be expressed as functions of
the inputs by use of the sampled signal flow graph and Mason's
gain formula. However, the sampled flow graph does not contain
the unsampled variables X1, X2, . . .. Since the actual output responses
of most sampled-data systems are of the continuous type, the expres-
sions of continuous responses are often desired. For this operation
we shall define the "composite signal flow graph." A composite
signal flow graph is a composition of the original flow graph and
the sampled flow graph of a sampled-data system; the sampling
switches in the original flow graph are deleted and are replaced by
their corresponding artificial input sources. If on the original flow
graph a sampler is located between node i and node j and the signal
is transmitted from i to j, the sampling operation is described by
drawing a branch of unity gain from node X* of the sampled flow
graph to node X, on the original flow graph. From the composite
signal flow graph, all the sampled and the unsampled output variables
can be determined as functions of the input signals by means of
Mason's gain formula. Actually, once the composite signal flow graph
is constructed, a separate sampled flow graph need not be constructed,

116 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION Chap. 5
since the former graph will contain all the information on the
unsampled variables.
Let us use the simple sampled-data system shown in Fig. 5-2 to
illustrate the construction of the composite flow graph introduced
above. The original signal flow graph of the system is shown in
Fig. 5-9, and the sampled signal flow graph is already obtained as
shown in Fig. 5-10. As is apparent, the variables in the two flow
graphs are related by Eq. (5-39); that is X₂ = X*. Therefore, the
composite flow graph is constructed by drawing a branch with unity
gain from node X of the sampled flow graph to node X2 on the
original flow graph. The composite flow graph is shown in Fig.
5-11. Now by use of Mason's formula the continuous output response
of the system is written
C(s)
-(HG)*
=
G(s)
1+ HG*(s)
R* (s)
G
1
G
R
E = X₁
X2
X3=C
-H
(5-51)
Fig. 5-11 Composite signal flow graph of the sampled-data system
shown in Fig. 5-2.
which agrees with the result obtained previously in Eq. (5-16). The
unsampled input R(s) does not appear in the expression for C(s)
since there is no forward path from R to C in the composite flow
graph. In a similar manner, the continuous signal E(s) is obtained
from the composite flow graph,
E(s)
=
R(s)
G(s)H(s)R*(s)
=
1
1 + HG*(s) 1 + HG*(5) R(s)
(5-52)
As is easy to see, the sampled variables C*(s) and E*(s) given in
Eqs. (5-47) and (5-48), respectively, can also be derived directly
from the composite flow graph simply by use of the gain formula.
Example 5-1.
In this example the sampled and the unsampled output variables of the

Sec. 5.2 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
117
X2=X₁*
D*G
1
G2
1
X₁ =E
X3
Xq=C
Fig. 5-12 Original signal flow graph of the sampled-data system
shown in Fig. 5-6.
sampled-data system shown in Fig. 5-6 will be evaluated by use of the
composite signal flow graph method. Following the steps outlined above:
(1) The original signal flow graph of the system is constructed in Fig.
5-12.
(2) From the original flow graph, the following set of equations is written
in accordance with the form of Eq. (5-49). (As mentioned previously, equations
can and usually should be written directly in the form of Eq. (5-50) by
applying Mason's formula and taking the pulse transform simultaneously.
But as an illustration of the method of the composite flow graph, the originally
suggested steps are followed):
-
E = X₁ = = D*GG² X* +
1+ G₂
X₂ = X*
R
1+ G₂
X,
=
D*G₁
1+ G₂
R
X* +
1 + G₂
D*G₁G₂
G.R
X₁ =
1+ G₂
X* +
1 + G₂
(5-53)
(5-54)
(5-55)
(5-56)
For the sake of simplicity the functions of s symbols are omitted in the above
equations; that is, X, denotes X₁(s), D* denotes D*(s), etc.
Taking the pulse transform on both sides of the above four equations
yields
X* =
=
-
GG2
· D* ( G+ G4 ) * X * + (1 RG₂) *
X* = X*
X3* = D*
1+ G₂
(1 C₁₂ ) * X * +
1+ G
R
+²G.)*
X + + (1 + G₂)
(GR)*
*
X; = D (GG)*x; +
X*
+G2
(5-57)
(5-58)
(5-59)
(5-60)
From the above equations with sampled variables, the sampled signal flow
graph of the system is drawn in Fig. 5-13; the composite flow graph of the
system is drawn in Fig. 5-14.
Now by use of Mason's gain formula, the sampled and the unsampled
output variables of the system are determined from the composite flow graph:

118
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
1
R
(1 AG2)*
R
(TAGZ
G₁
1+G2
0x2
G₁G2
D
1+ G₂'
G₂R
G₁G2
-D*(1+G2
Fig. 5-13 Sampled signal flow graph of the sampled-data system
shown in Fig. 5-6.
G₁
1
1+G2
G₂R
G₁G2
G₁G2
1+G2
X2
D*G₁
G2
1
Χα
X4=C
X3
E=X₁
Fig. 5-14 Composite signal flow graph of the sampled-data system
shown in Fig. 5-6.
C*
=
x = (1 GR₂
*
1+
D* ( G,G₁₂) *
+
R
*
(5-61)
1 + D* ( GG₂ ) * (1 + G₂
1+ G₂/
which can be simplified to the following form:
C*
=
*
R
D*
(GR)*+ [(GR) + (1 + C) * ] D + (GG)"
Because of the relationship,
1 + D*
R* = RG₂
Eq. (5-62) becomes.
1+ G
(G,G₁₂) *
(1 RGC, )* + (1 RG,)*
1 +
*
(5-62)
*
(5-63)

Sec. 5.2 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
119
C*
(GR) * + D* ( G,G+,) *
=
:)*
R*
1 + D*
(GG)*
which agrees with the result obtained previously in Eq. (5-33).
(5-64)
The unsampled output signal C(s) is obtained from the composite flow
graph when Mason's gain formula is applied. Thus
C =
RG₂ 1+ D*
[
( G:G₁₂ ) * ] + ( RG₂) * D*G,G₂
(5-65)
1
2
1 + G₂ + D* (1G,G²)* + G₂D* (G1G4)*
2
+
Equation (5-65) is simplified to the following form:
R
1+ G₂
Ꭰ
C
G.R
1+ G₂
+
GIG₂
1+ G₂
D. (G)*
X
1+D (GC)*
*
1+
(5-66)
which agrees with the result obtained previously in Eq. (5-36).
Example 5-2
As another illustrative example, let us consider the multisampler system
shown in Fig. 5-15. The original flow graph of the system is drawn in Fig.
5-16.
R(s)
E(s)
G₁(s)
G₂(s)
H(s)
T
RO
Fig. 5-15 A multisampler sampled-data system.
G₁
X2=x*
X3
-H
C(s)
G₂
X5
X5=C
Fig. 5-16 Original signal flow graph of the system in Fig. 5-15.
Note that in the signal flow graph of Fig. 5-16, variables X, and X, are
assigned to the inputs of the two samplers. Therefore, the following equations
can be written directly from Fig. 5-16 by the use of Mason's gain formula
(also taking the pulse transforms at the same time):
X = (G₁G₂)*X* + (G₂H)*X* + R*
X* = X*
(5-67)
(5-68)

120
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
-(G,G2)
R*O
G
(G₂H)*
(G,G₂)
-H
X5
X=c*
-(G₂H)
Fig. 5-17 Sampled flow graph of the system shown in Fig. 5-15.
-(G₁G₂)
(G₂H)*
G₁
Χ
(G₁G2)*
1
-(G₂H)*
-H
G₁
G2
1
X2
X3
X5
X5=C
-1
Fig. 5-18 Composite signal flow graph of the system shown in
Fig. 5-15.
X* = G*X* – H*X*
X* = X*
X = (G,G₂)*X* − (G₂H)*X*
(5-69)
(5-70)
(5-71)
These equations with sampled signals above are now represented by the
sampled signal flow graph shown in Fig. 5-17. Next, we eliminate the two
samplers from the original flow graph and connect nodes X and X* of the
sampled flow graph to nodes X, and X, on the original flow graph, respec-
tively, by unity gain branches; we have the composite flow graph as shown
in Fig. 5-18. The sampled and the unsampled outputs of the system are
obtained from the composite flow graph using Mason's formula. Therefore,
C* = X*
=
(G,G)*R*
−
1 + (G₁G₂)* + (G₂H)* − (G₁G₂)*(G₂H)* + (G₁G₂)*(G₂H)*
which is then simplified to
(G,G₂)*R*
C*
=
1 + (G₁G₂)* + (G₂H)*
(5-72)
(5-73)

Sec. 5.3 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION 121
The continuous output is
C = X5
=
G₁G₂[1 + (G₂H)*] − (G₁G₂)*G₂H
1 + (G₁G₂)* + (G₂H)*
R*
(5-74)
5.3 MODIFIED Z-TRANSFORM OF OUTPUTS OF CLOSED-LOOP
SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
The modified z-transfer function of an open-loop sampled-data
system is discussed in Sec. 4-8. In order to describe the response
between sampling instants, a fictitious time delay AT is inserted in
the open-loop system as shown in Fig. 5-19.
E(s) +
E*(s)
G(s)
T
Fictitious
sampler
C(z, m)
T
-AT
e
C(s)
Fictitious time
delay
Fig. 5-19 Open-loop system with sampled-data and with the
fictitious time delay.
Without the fictitious delay the Laplace transform of the output
response of the system is
C(s) = G(s)E*(s)
and the ordinary pulse transform of c(t) is
or
C*(s) = G*(s)E*(s)
=
C(z) G(2)E(x)
(5-75)
(5-76)
(5-77)
With the fictitious delay inserted in the open-loop system, the
modified pulse transform of the delayed output is
where
=
C(s) G(s)E*(s)
00
(5-78)
Gm(s) = L [g(t − AT)] = £ Σ g(nT − kT)Ɛ(t − nT)
-
n=0
-
-
(5-79)
and a similar expression defines C(s). The modified z-transform of
the system output is therefore,
where
C(z, m) = G(z, m)E(z)
G(z, m) = [G*(s)]s= (1/T) Inz
(5-80)
(5-81)
Note that the modified z-transform operation does not affect the
term: E*(s), in Eq. (5-78). Therefore, the modified z-transform of
Eq. (5-75) is given by Eq. (5-80), but not by C(z, m) = G(z, m)
E(z, m).

122
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
In the analysis of a closed-loop sampled-data system by use of
the modified z-transform method, a fictitious time advance of AT
must be inserted in the feedback path as shown in Fig. 5-20; then
Fictitious
sampler
C(z, m)
T
C(s)
R(s)
E(s) E*(s)
G(s)
-AT
e
Fictitious time
delay
H(s)
+AT
e
Fictitious time
advance
Fig. 5-20 Fictitious time delay and time advance in a closed-loop
sampled-data system for modified z-transform analysis.
the actual signal in the system is not affected by the fictitious delay
in the forward path. From the modified system block diagram of
Fig. 5-20, the modified z-transform of the system output c(t) is
derived as follows:
C(s) = G(s)E*(s)e-ATS
(5-82)
Taking the modified z-transform on both sides of Eq. (5-82) yields
C(z, m) = G(z, m)E(z)
Substituting the relationship of
(5-83)
(5-84)
E(x)
=
R(2)
1+ GH(2)
into Eq. (5-83), we get
C(z, m) =
G(z, m)
1+GH(2)
R(z)
(5-85)
From the above derivations we see that the modified z-transform
of a time function c(t) can be obtained directly from the Laplace
transform C(s) once C(s) is given. This means that if C(s) is the
output of a sampled-data system, the modified z-transform of the
output can be obtained directly from C(s) once C(s) is determined
from the composite signal flow graph of the system. Since in
sampled-data systems C(s) is usually of the form (see Eq. 5-75):
C(s) A(s) B* (s)
=
(5-86)
where A(s) denotes a continuous function and B*(s) denotes a
discrete function, the modified z-transform of c(t) is written directly
from Eq. (5-86),

Sec. 5.3 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION 123
C(z, m) = A(z, m)B(z)
(5-87)
where A(z, m) is the modified z-transform of A(s) and B(z) is
merely the ordinary z-transform of B(s) or B*(s).
As an illustrative example, the modified z-transform of the output
of the system in Example 5-2 is determined in the following:
The Laplace transform of c(t) is given in Eq. (5-74). Applying
the modified z-transform operation to Eq. (5-74) in the same manner
as from Eq. (5-86) to (5-87), we have
C(z, m)
=
G₁G₂(≈, m)[1 + G₂H(≈)] − G₁G₂(z)G₂H₂(z, m)
1 + G₁G₂(z) + G₂H(z)
R(z)
(5-88)
In a more formal approach the modified z-transform of any signal
in a sampled-data system can be obtained by simply modifying the
composite flow graph as described in the following and then applying
Mason's gain formula. Starting with Eq. (5-49), if the modified z-
transform of the variable X, is desired, we simply take the modified
pulse transform on both sides of Eq. (5-49) to get
X*m = Σ (ass)*X* + Σ (bxjRx)m
i
k
(5-89)
where (a) and (bxRx) denote the modified pulse transforms of
a) and bjRk, respectively. Actually, Eq. (5-89) can always be written
directly from the original flow graph of the sampled-data system by
applying Mason's formula and taking the modified z-transform
simultaneously.
Once Eq. (5-89) is written, the composite flow graph of the
system is modified by adding nodes and branches on the graph
corresponding to the portrayal of Eq. (5-89); then, when Mason's
formula is applied to the modified flow graph, the modified pulse
transform (or modified z-transform) of X, is obtained.
Example 5-3
As an illustration of the construction of the modified composite flow graph
of a multiloop, multisampler system, let us consider the system in Example
5-2 (Fig. 5-15). The set of equations written from the original signal flow
graph in Fig. 5-16 is repeated as follows:
X₁ =
X2
X₂ = X*
G₁G₂X* + HG₂X* + R
X₁ = G₁X - HX*
X₁ = X*
X₁ = G₁G₂X – G₂HX*
(5-90)
(5-91)
(5-92)
(5-93)
(5-94)
The pulse transforms of the above five equations are given in Eqs. (5-67)

124
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
through (5-71); based on these equations, the sampled and the composite
flow graphs of the systems are constructed in Figs. 5-17 and 5-18, respectively.
In order to determine the modified z-transform of the system output c(t), we
take the modified pulse transform of both sides of Eq. (5-94) (since X, = C),
thus
X*m
C
=
(G₁G₂)*X* − (G₂H)*X*
X5m
(5-95)
-(6,62)
(G,G₂m
1
(G₂H)*
-- (G₂H)
G
(G,G₂)
G₁
X2
X₁
-H
-H
-(G₂H)*
1
G2
-1
Fig. 5-21 The modified composite signal flow graph of the system
in Fig. 5-15.
5m
*
m
The modified composite flow graph of the system is now drawn in Fig. 5-21;
a node at some convenient point representing the variable X = C is added
to the flow graph, and branches with branch gains of (G,G₂) and − (G₂H)*
are connected from nodes X and X* respectively to X. The modified
pulse transform of c(t) is obtained directly from Fig. 5-21 by use of Mason's
gain formula. Therefore,
C*
m
-
(G,G₂) [1 + (G₂H)*] − (G,G₂)*(G₂H)* R*
1+ (G,G₂)*+ (G₂H)*
and the modified z-transform of c(t) is
C(z, m) =
-
GG(z, m)[1+ G.H(≈)] G,G,(z)GH(≈, m)
1 + G₁G₂(≈) + G₂H(z)
(5-96)
R(≈)
(5-97)
Clearly this result agrees with that obtained previously in Eq. (5-88).

Sec. 5.4 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
125
5.4 TRANSMISSION MATRIX OF SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS+
The fact that a sampled-data system deals with sequences of
numbers rather than with continuous time functions makes the use
of matrix representation convenient for analysis and synthesis. We
have seen that the matrix method is particularly useful in the
analysis and design of sampled-data systems with time-varying
components as well as systems with nonlinear elements.
In this section the matrix representation of linear time-invariant
sampled-data systems will be discussed. In later chapters, the matrix
method will be extended to the studies of time varying and non-
linear sampled-data systems.
e(t)
(1)
G(s)
E(s) E(S)
T
Fictitious
sampler
c*(t)
C*(s)
C(z)
c(t)
C(s)
Fig. 5-22 Open-loop sampled-data system.
Consider the open-loop sampled-data system shown in Fig. 5-22.
The system consists of a linear time-invariant plant preceded by a
sampler and followed by a fictitious sampler; the samplers are
assumed to have a sampling period of T sec and are synchronized.
It follows from the discussion on the weighting sequence given in
Sec. 4.6 that the continuous output of the system is obtained through
the use of the superposition principle; that is,
00
c(t) = Σ g(t − kT)e(kT)
k=0
(5-98)
where g(tkT) is the impulse response of the plant G due to an
impulse occurring at t = kT.
At the sampling instants, the output of the systems is
00
c(nT) = Σg(nT
-
kT)e(kT)
(5-99)
k=0
For a physical system initially at rest, we may normally assume
that the response of the system is zero prior to the application of
an output. Hence,
B. Friedland, “ A Technique for the Analysis of Time Varying Sampled-Data
Systems," A. I. E. E. Trans. 75, Part 1956, pp. 407–414.
E. Kinnen, and J.T. Tou, “Analysis of Nonlinear Sampled-Data Control Systems,"
A. I. E. E. Trans. 75, Part II, 1960, pp. 386-390.
Sun, C. H., "Matrix Solution of Nonlinear Sampled-Data Control Systems," Ph. D
Dissertation, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, 1961.

126
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
g(nTkT) = 0 for n <k
(5-100)
The upper limit of Eq. (5-99) can be changed from ∞ to n as
indicated below:
n
c(nT) = − g(nT − kT)e(kT)
k=0
-
(5-101)
In general, Eq. (5-101) may be written as a matrix equation:
Ck
=
GKEk
(5-102)
where
c(0)
c(T)
Co
Ck = c(2T)
= C2
نت
= col [co, C1, C2, . . . Cn]
where c, = c(jT)
(5-103)
and
c(nT)
e(0)
eo
e(T)
ei
Ex = e(2T)
= e2
=
col [eo, e1, e2, . . . en]
(5-104)
Gk
=
=
where e, e(jT)
e(nT)
go
0 0
0
0
g2
50 50
50 50
go
0
0
0
go
0
0
(5-105)
g3
g2
50
go
0
gn gn-1 gn-2 gn-3
go
where g) = g(jT) = g(nTkT). G is defined as the transmission
matrix for G.
Note that for the transmission matrix G the element at the j-th
row and the p-th column is physically the contribution to the j-th
sampled output (j = 0, 1, 2, ..., n) due to a unit impulse input at
the p-th (p = 0, 1, 2, . . ., n) sampling instant. Since an output contri-
bution exists only after an input is applied but not before it, this
·

Sec. 5.4 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
127
accounts for the fact that all the elements of the matrix G above
the principal diagonal are equal to zero. This is characteristic of
the transmission matrix of a physical sampled-data system.
As explained in Sec. 4.4, Eq. (4-39), when G(z), the z-transform
of g(t), is expanded into a power series in powers of z¹, the
coefficient for z is the value of the impulse response at t = kT,
or gk. Thus, the transmission matrix may be obtained from the
z-transform of the transmission function G(z) by the following
steps:
(1) Given G(z), expand G(z) into a power series in powers of
z¹; that is,
-k
G(z) = go+g12¯¹ + 822¯² + 832-³ + + 8k z ¯ +
...
...
(5-106)
(2) Write the transmission matrix starting with go at the principal
diagonal, and working toward the left with g₁, g2, and g³,
consecutively, as shown below:
go
gi
go
go
go
50 50
g2
50 50
50 50
gn gn-1 gn-2
(3) Fill in with zeros for all the elements above the principal
diagonal.
As an illustrative example, the transmission matrix of a discrete
integrator is determined as follows:
G(z) = 3(1)=
(ㅎ​)
Z
=
1 + z +
+
+
...
(5-107)
1
Since all the coefficients in the expansion of G(z) are equal to 1,
the transmission matrix for G is simply
Gk
=
1 0 0 0 0 0
1 1 0 0 0 0
1 1
1 1 1 1 00
100 0
(5-108)
1 0

128
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
Transmission Matrices of Parallel and Series Combinations of
Components
Since in general, sampled-data control systems consist of a number
of components interconnected directly or through sampling switches,
the transmission matrices of parallel and series combinations of
system components must be investigated. A parallel combination of
two components is shown in Fig. 5-23a. By the principle of super-
c*(1)
(1)
A
_e(t)X_e* (1)
c(1)
_e(1)_X_e*(1)
G
-c(t)
T
B
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5-23 (a) Parallel combination of components. (b) Trans-
mission matrix Gk = Ak + Bx·
position, we can see that the transmission matrix for the parallel
combination is simply equal to the sum of the transmission matrices
of the two components; that is
=
Gk Ak + Bk
Also, we know that
(5-109)
(5-110)
G(x) = A(z) + B(z)
Thus the transmission matrix equation and the z-transform equation
satisfy the same rule of linear combination.
A series combination of two elements is shown in Fig. 5-24a.
Let the input and output signals of the two elements be as designated
in Fig. 5-24a. Then, the output of the series combination is given
by the following matrix equations:
Ck = BkMk = ВkAkEk
(5-111)
c* (1)
e(t)
*(1)
m(1)
m*(1)
e(t)
A
B
X
(1)
G
c (1)
T
c(1)
T
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5-24 (a) Series combination of components. (b) Transmis-
sion matrix Gk = ВkAk
Equation (5-111) implies that the transmission matrix of the series
combination of two elements A and B connected through a sampling
switch, is equal to the product of the transmission matrices of the
two elements. Similarly, the z-transform of the system output is

Sec. 5.4 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
129
C(z) B(z) A(z)E(z)
=
(5-112)
Note that Eqs. (5-111) and (5-112) are identical in form just as
Eqs. (5-109) and (5-110) are. Note especially that since matrix
multiplication is not commutative, BA generally does not equal
AB. However, the multiplication of B(z) and A(z) in the z-trans-
form equation of Eq. (5-112) is commutative.
Transmission Matrix of a Feedback Control System
Using the properties of the combination of components developed
above, we are now able to determine the transmission matrix for a
feedback control system with sampled-data. The transmission matrix
for the simple feedback system with sampled-data shown in Fig.
5-25 is derived as an example. In matrix notation the sampled error
signal is written as:
Digital
-compensator-
Plant
r(1)
e(t)
D(s)
G(s)
- c(t)
where
Fig. 5-25 Unity feedback control system with sampled-data.
EkRkCk
Ск
Ex = col [eo, e1, e2, ... en]
Rk col [ro, T1, T2, . . . rn]
=
Ck col [Co, C1, C2, . . . Cn]
=
(5-113)
(5-114)
(5-115)
(5-116)
By use of the matrix equation in Eq. (5-111), the system output
is found to be
CkGkDk Ek
(5-117)
where D denotes the transmission matrix for the discrete com-
pensator and Gk represents the transmission matrix for the plant.
which includes the zero-order hold.
Substitution of Eq. (5-117) into Eq. (5-113) yields
Ek
=
Rk
-
GkDkEk
Solving for Ex in the last equation, we have
Ek (1+ GkDk) - ¹Rk
(1+GkDk)¹Rk
(5-118)
(5-119)
provided that (1 + GkDk) is nonsingular. Now substituting Eq.
(5-119) into Eq. (5-117) yields
Letting
CkGkDk(1 + GkDk) ¹Rk
Мк
=
GkD*(1+GkDk)¯¹
(5-120)
(5-121)

130
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
where M. denotes the closed-loop transmission matrix of the system,
then
Ck = MkRk
Mk 1 (1 + GkDk)´¹
It can also be shown easily that
(5-122)
(5-123)
The above form for M is frequently convenient for computation of
system responses.
It is clear that Eq. (5-121) corresponds to the z-transform of
the output of the closed-loop system; that is
C(z)
=
G(z)D(z)
1+G(z)D(z)
R(z)
(5-124)
5.5 THE STATE-VARIABLE APPROACH
In general, system analysis and synthesis may be carried out by
two major approaches. One approach is the use of the conventional
transfer functions, block diagrams, or signal flow graphs. The other
method, which has gained popularity among modern engineers, is
the state-transition or state-variable approach. In the state-transition
approach the system is characterized by a set of first-order differential
or difference equations describing the state variables of the system.
Each component of the system is decomposed into the basic mathema-
tical elements describing it. The system is then analyzed or designed
by solving the set of first-order equations, rather than a single
higher-order equation or a set of higher-order equations.
The state-transition method has at least the following advantages
as compared to the block diagram or transfer function approach:
(1) By use of vector-matrix notation a set of first-order differential
equations may be represented by a single expression. This simplifies
the mathematical notation.
(2) Obtaining the solution of a set of first-order differential
equations is much easier than solving a high-order differential
equation.
(3) The initial conditions of the system are readily given by
↑ T. R. Bashkow, “The A Matrix, a New Network Description," I. R. E. Trans.
on Circuit Theory, Vol. CT-4, Sept. 1957, pp. 117-120; R. E. Kalman, J. E. Bertram,
"A Unified Approach to the Theory of Sampling Systems," Journal of Franklin
Institute, 267, May 1959, pp. 405-436. E. O. Gilbert, "A Method for the Symbolic
Representation and Analysis of Linear Periodic Feedback Systems," A. I. E. E. Trans.
Part 2, 79, pp. 512-523, 1960.

Sec. 5.5 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
131
the state-transition equations. The calculation of the initial conditions
by conventional techniques can be tedious.
(4) The state-transition approach allows a unified study of
sampled-data systems. This includes uniform sampling, multirate
sampling, cyclic sampling, as well as random sampling and finite
pulse-width considerations.
(5) The state-transition method can be applied to certain types
of nonlinear systems and time-varying systems.
State Variables And State-Transition Equations of Continuous-Data
Systems
For an n-th order linear system with continuous-data, the system
dynamics may be represented by the following set of n equations:
dx/dt = f(x1, x2, . . ., Xn, r1, T2, ..., rm)
where X1, X2, X3,
·
(i = 1, 2, 3,...,n)
..."
(5-125)
.., în are the set of n system variables which are
defined as state variables; r₁, r2, r3, . . rm are the m inputs of the
system; fi, f2, . . ., fn represent functional relations. Often, the output
of the system is designated as one of the state variables, although
this designation is not essential. The set of first-order equations
may be described by an analog computer diagram or a signal flow
graph. In essence, the n equations may be written as
n
m
dx/dt = Σ aux,(t) + Σ burn(t)
j=1
k=1
(i = 1, 2, 3,...,n)
(5-126)
where a is a constant denoting the gain of the path connected
between the output of the j-th integrator and the input of the i-th
integrator; b₁k is the gain between the k-th input r and the input
of the i-th integrator. A typical signal flow graph portraying the
summing of signals (state variables and inputs) at the input node
of the ith integrator is illustrated in Fig. 5-26. The s¹ operator
denotes the integration operation. Note that the convention used
here is not in exact agreement with the practical analog computer
notation in that amplification and integration are not accompanied
by a sign change.
In vector-matrix notation the set of first-order linear equations
of Eq. (5-125) may be written as
↑ If Q of the system outputs y is not included in the state variables, these outputs
must be written as functions of the state variables and the inputs; that is
Yq(t) = 8q(X1, X2, .
"
Xn, T1, T2, . . ., Tm), q = 1, 2, . . ., Q.

132 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
Chap. 5
4(1)
-1
ain
Oii
aij
Outputs of
integrators
Fig. 5-26 Analog signal flow graph simulating the equation
=
dt
dx/dt
= Ax + Br
where x is a column matrix for the state variables; that is,
and
x = col[x₁(t) x2(t)
Xз(t) . . . xn(t)]
r = col [r₁(t)
r₂(t)
r3(t).
rs(t) ...rm(t)]
(5-127)
A is an n x n square matrix whose elements are defined by a₁j; B
is an n x m matrix.
The matrix equation of Eq. (5-127) gives a detailed description
of the transition of state of the system's state variables x from
x₁(t) to x₁(t) + dx,(t) when time is changed from t to t + dt. Since
dt is an infinitesimal time change, the transition of a continuous-
data system takes place in a continuous fashion with respect to
time.
Finally, a quantitative description of the state transition of the
system may be obtained by solving the matrix equation of Eq.
(5-127). Taking the Laplace transform on both sides of Eq. (5–127),
we have
sX(s) = AX(s) + BR(s) + x(to)
Solving for X(s) yields
X(s) = (sI A)¯¹x(to) + (sI - A) 'BR(s)
(5-128)
(5-129)
where x(t) denotes the initial condition of x(t) evaluated at t = to.
Since A is a constant matrix, the inverse Laplace transform of
(SIA) is simplyt
[(SIA)'] = Þ(t − to) = elt-to)^
--
The inverse Laplace transform of X(s) in Eq. (5–129) is
x(t) = Þ(t − to)x(tô) + √ Þ(t − 7)Br(7)dT
–
(5-130)
(5-131)
where the second term on the right-hand side of the equation is
The inverse Laplace transform of 1/(s - a) is e(l-lo)a

Sec. 5.5 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
133
the convolution integral. Now, the equations represented by the
vector-matrix of Eq. (5-131) are defined as the state-transition
equations; (t - to) is sometimes called the state-transition matrix
of the dynamic system.
Although the use of vector matrices in the state-variable approach
leads to simplified notations, the matrix method is not necessarily
the simplest way of arriving at the state-transition equations. The
problem is considerably simplified if the solution is carried out using
the signal flow graph approach. The state-transition flow graph is
defined as the analog computer simulation flow graph with the initial
conditions (tô ), X2(tő), . . ., Xn(to) as input signals applied at the
corresponding output nodes of the integrators. The state-transition
equations of the system can then be determined from the transition
flow graph merely by applying Mason's formula and taking the inverse
Laplace transform.
To illustrate the application of the state-variable approach to
continuous-data systems, the following example is given.
Example 5-4
Consider a continuous-data system with open-loop transfer function
We let
and
=
1
+1)
=
5-2
1+5
C(s)
R(s) ¯ s(s + 1)
C(s) = s¯²X(s) = s¯¹X2(s)
R(s) = (1 + s¯¹)X(s)
Equation (5-134) can also be written as
X(s) s¹X(s) + R(s)
=
-
(5-132)
(5-133)
(5-134)
(5-135)
From these equations the signal flow graph which represents the analog
computer simulation of the system is constructed in Fig. 5-27. The state
variables are designated as x and x2, where x is also the system output c.
x2
1
S
X₁ = c
-1
Fig. 5-27 Signal flow graph representing the analog computer
simulation of a second-order feedback control system.
From the signal flow graph the following two first-order differential equations
are written in accordance with Eq. (5-126):
dx/dt = x2(t)
dx/dtx₂(t) + r(t)
Therefore,
A
=
-1
1
(5-136)
(5-137) ✓
B
-0
R

134
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
Thus
For a unit-step input
-
1
1
S
(SI - A)-¹ =
s(s + 1)
1
(5-138)
0
s+ 1
1
p(t-to)
1 - e-(1-to)
=
e-(1-to)
(5-139)
t
-
to - 1 + e-(l-lo)
1 - e-(l-lo)
(5-140)
S. $(t − T) Br(T) dt = [
Therefore, the state-transition equations of the system are given by the matrix
equation:
x₁(t)
x₂(t).
= [
1- e-(t-to) ´x₁(to) t- ·to - 1 + e-(1-10)
e-(1-10)
X
+
x2(to)
1 - e-(1-to)
(5-141)
The problem is considerably simplified if the solution is earried out using
the signal flow graph method. When the initial conditions x,(t) and x½(t†)
are applied to the state-variable nodes x, and x2, respectively, we have the
state-transition flow graph as shown in Fig. 5-28.
R(s)O
S
OX₁(s)
X2(s)
Fig. 5-28 State transition flow graph of a second-order feedback
control system.
The state-transition equations in the Laplace transform domain are readily
written by applying Mason's formula to the transition flow graph. Thus
X₁(s)
=
+
S
x₁(to) x(to)
s(s + 1)
+
R(s)
s(s + 1)
X₂(s)
x2 (to)
R(s)
=
+
s + 1
s+ 1
(5-142)
(5-143)
Taking the inverse Laplace transform of Eqs. (5-142) and (5-143) yields (r
is a unit-step input).
x₁(t) = x₁(to) + x2(to)[1 − e−α-to)] + tto 1+ e¯(l-lo)
—
x(t) = x(t)e-t-to) + 1 - e-(l-to)
-
(5-144)
(5-145)
These equations are in exact agreement with the result in Eq. (5-141).
State- Variables and State-Transition Equations of Discrete-Data Systems
In contrast to continuous-data systems, which are described by

Sec. 5.5 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION 135
differential equations, discrete-data systems are generally described
by difference equations. For an n-th order linear system with discrete-
data, the system dynamic may be represented by the following set
of first-order difference equations:
m
x[(k + 1)T] = Σ d₁‚æ‚(kT) + Ź Csprp(kT)
....
j=1
p=1
(i = 1, 2, 3,...,n)
(5-146)
where X1, X2,
In are the state variables, and kT denotes the
sampling instants. In general, the outputs of the system may be
expressed as functions of x, and r,, whether or not the outputs are
included in the state variables. Therefore, the system outputs can
be written as
n
m
Ya(kT) = Σ €qsxs(kT) + Σ fpar‍n(kT)
j=1
p=1
(5-147)
Equations (5-146) and (5-147) are in a form that may be programmed
directly on a digital computer. In other words, the two equations
may be represented by a digital computer program consisting of
such arithmetic manipulations as addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and storage (time delay). Then, in Eq. (5-146), d, is a constant
denoting the gain of the path connected between the output of the
j-th storage unit and the input of the i-th storage unit; Cip denotes
the gain between the p-th input r,(kT) and the input of the i-th
storage unit. A typical flow graph portraying the organization of
the direct digital programming of difference equations is illustrated
in Fig. 5-29. The z¹ operator indicates storage or a time delay of
e
r(KT)o
OY(KT)
xq(k+1)T
xa (KT)
-011
xq[(k+1)T] = −0₁₁xq(kT) + r(kT)
y(KT) = (e-fo,)x, (KT) + fr(KT)
Fig. 5-29 Signal flow graph illustrating the digital computer pro-
gramming of two first-order difference equations.
T seconds.
Equations (5-146) and (5-147) can be put into vector-matrix
form:
x[(k + 1)T] = Dx(kT) + Cr(kT)
y(kT) = Ex(kT) + Fr(kT)
(5-148)
(5-149)

136
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION Chap. 5
The matrix equations of Eqs. (5-148) and (5-149) give description
of the transition of state of the discrete state variable x, from x₁(kT)
to x(k+1)T when time is changed from kT to (k+1)T. The state
transition of a discrete-data system can take place only at discrete
instants of time. The solution of Eq. (5-148) can be found directly
by taking the z-transform on both sides of the equation:
2X(z) = DX(2) + CR(z) + zx(0)
(5-150)
where x(0) denotes the initial condition of x(kT) evaluated at k = 0.
Solving for X(z) in the last equation yields
-
X(z) = (xI - D)¯¹zx(0) + (≈I — D)¯¹CR(z)
-
(5-151)
Since D is a constant matrix, the inverse z-transform of (zI — D)-¹z
is simply
Dk
3 [ID]'z = Þ(kT) = D*
The inverse z-transform of X(z) in Eq. (5-151) is
k-1
-
(5-152)
x(kT) = Þ(kT)x(0) + Σ ø(kT – T – nT)Cr(kT) (5-153)
n=0
-
where the second term on the right-hand side of the equation is
recognized as the convolution summation. Comparison of Eq. (5-153)
with Eq. (5-131) shows that the solutions for discrete-data and
continuous-data systems are analogous.
Transition Equations of Sampled-Data Systems
In most sampled-data systems the signals found in the systems
are continuous as well as discrete. Thus, ordinarily a sampled-data
system containing discrete and continuous elements should be de-
scribed by sets of difference equations and differential equations. In
general, we may classify the dynamic elements in a sampled-data
system into the following three catagories:
(1) continuous dynamic elements - described by differential equa-
tions
(2) discrete dynamic elements - described by difference equations
(3) sample and hold elements-described by discrete state-transi-
tion equations.
The state variables and transition equations of the first two
categories have been discussed in the preceding sections. Namely,
we can write the set of differential equations in Eq. (5-126) for the
continuous elements and the set of difference equations of Eqs. (5-146)
and (5-147) for the discrete elements. Usually, sample-and-hold elements
are connected between discrete and continuous elements. We shall

Sec. 5.5 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION 137
assume that sampling and hold are one combined operation. Thus,
the output of a sampled-and-hold element between two consecutive
sampling instants is a step function. If the input and the output
of the i-th sampled-and-hold element are denoted by y(t) and h(t),
respectively, we can write.
h(kT+) = y (kt)
where kT really means kT + T for 0 <T<T.
(5-154)
In general, the input to a sampled-and-hold element is a linear
combination of the system's state variable and the system inputs.
Equation (5-154) can be written as
71
m
h.(kT*) = Σ Sı,x,(kT) + Z Viuru(kT)
j=1
where S, and Viu are constants.
u = 1
(5-155)
The state-transition equations of the complete sampled-data
system can be obtained from the combined solutions of Eqs. (5-155),
(5-147), (5-146), and (5–126). In fact, the state-transition equations
can be written directly from the composition of the signal flow
graphs portraying Eqs. (5-128), (5-146), (5-147), and (5-155).
To illustrate the analysis of a sampled-data system by the state-
transition approach, the following examples are given:
Example 5-5
Consider the second-order sampled-data system shown in Fig. 5-30. The
continuous-data part of the system is considered in Ex. 5-4. Therefore, from
Eq. (5-141), the state-transition equations of the continuous elements in
matrix form are written as
Zero-order
hold
G(s) =
1
s(s+1)
C
Fig. 5-30 Sampled-data system.
´x₁(t)' 1 1 - e-(t-to)
x2(t)
=
+
e-(1-to)
t to 1+e-l-to)
-
1 - e-(t-to)
x₁(to)
X
x2 (to)
"] [<>]
(5-156)
(5-157)
The sample-and-hold element is described by
h(t) = e(t。) = r(to) — x₁(to)
Also,
x₁(t) = x₁(to) and x2(t) = x2(to)
Substituting Eq. (5-157) and the initial conditions into Eq. (5-156) yields

138
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
[x₁(t)]
x2(t)
2
-
(t − to) — e-(t-to)
1 - e-(t-lo)
=
x₁ (to)
e-(1-lo)
x₂ (to)
t
-
1 - e-(t-to)
(5-158)
+
Letting t = kT + T, t − to
−1 + e-(1-to)
to - 1+e-l-lo)
=
'] [r(to)]
T since tkT+. The transition equations at
the sampling instants are written as
[x₁(k+1) T
x2(k + 1)T
=
+
2 Te-T 1
-
−1 + e¯”
-
e-r
x(kT)
* (kT)
"] [rch
r(kT)]
(5-159)
T-1+e-T
1 - e-T
The solution of this problem may be simplified if the signal flow graph
technique is used. The transition flow graph of the continuous-data elements
is repeated in Fig. 5-31a. By use of Eq. (5-157), the state-transition flow
15-1
1
S
1
S
H(s)
X₂(s)
X₁(5)
r(10)
n(%)
51
H(s)
-
(a)
x2(10)
1x₁(10)
-1
X2(s)
X₁(s)
(b)
Fig. 5-31 (a) State transition flow graph of continuous-data ele-
ments. (b) State transition flow graph of the sampled-data system
in Example 5-5.
graph of the sampled-data system is shown in Fig. 5-31b. The state-transition
equations of the system are now obtained from the transition flow graphs
applying Mason's formula. We have
1
1
S
X() = (-36 + 1)] + (6) + 3(8 + 1) %2(%)
[ 1 (s
5(s x2(to)
1
5(5
+55 (8 + 1) * (%)
5²(s
(5-160)

Sec. 5.5 BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
139
X₁(5)
=
-
1
1
+
5(s + 1) x1 (to) + 5 + 1 x2(to) +55 + 1) r (to)
Taking the inverse Laplace transform of the last two equations yields
-
x₁(t) = [2-(t − to) — e-(t-to)]x₁(to) + [1 − e−(t-to) ]X₂ (to)
-
-
-
-
+ [(t − to) − 1 + e¯l-lo) ]r(to)
-
-
(5-161)
(5-162)
x(t) = − [1 − e−(t−lo) ]x₁(to) + e−(t−to) x₂(to) + [1 - e--to) ]r(to) (5-163)
These two equations are identical to those given by Eq. (5-158).
Example 5-6
As another example of illustrating the application of the state-variable
approach to sampled-data systems, we shall consider the sampled-data system
shown in Fig. 5–32. Given that
·D(z)·
e
D(s)
-
1x3
Zero-order h
hold
G(s)
T
Fig. 5-32 Sampled-data system of Example 5-6.
G(s) =
1
ao + a₁z¹
-1
=
5(541) and D(z) 1 + b₁z-¹
the transition equations of the system are desired.
The transition flow graph of the continuous-data elements is already
shown in Fig. 5-28. The flow graph for the discrete dynamic elements must
be constructed. The transfer function for the discrete elements can be
written as
X₁(2)
E(z)
1
=
D(z) =
ao + a₁z-¹ (a。 + a₁z¯¹)X(2)
=
1 + b₁z¹
(1 + b₁2¯¹)X(2)
(5-164)
Letting
X3(z) = (a + a₁z¹)X(2)
(5-165)
and
E(z) = (1+b₁z¹)X(z)
(5-166)
we have from Eq. (5-166)
X(z) = E(z) – b₁z¯¹X(z)
(5-167)
Taking the inverse z-transform of Eqs. (5-165) and (5-167) yields
x3(kT) = ax(kT) + a₁x[(k − 1)T]
--
(5-168)
-
(5-169)
x(kT) = e(kT) — b₁x[(k − 1)T]
Letting x[(k − 1)T]= x(kT), the last two equations become
xз(kT) = a。[e(kT) − b₁x(kT)] + a₁x₁(kT)
-
-
= aoe (kT) + (a₁ — ab₁)x¸(kT)
x[(k+1)T] = e(kT) — b₁x¸(kT)
-
(5-170)
(5-171)
Equations (5-170) and (5-171) are the difference equations describing the

140
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
*(KT)
-b₁
ჯ (a, – a,b,)
e(kT)α
Ox (k+1)T
Dxz(KT)
XSKT)
-1
%
(a)
-b₁
(a,raob,)
r(KT)
1
e(kT)
X4(k+1)T
X3 (KT
(KT) h(t) H(s)
X2(5) X₁(5)
X₁(s)
%
(b)
Fig. 5-33 (a) Signal flow graph portraying the difference equa-
tions of the discrete elements. (b) The transition signal flow
graph of the sampled-data system in Example 5-6.
discrete-data elements of the system. Note that the equations are of the form
of Eqs. (5-146) and (5-147), respectively.
The signal flow graph which portrays the two difference equations is
drawn in Fig. 5-33a. This discrete transition flow graph must be linked with
the transition flow graph of the continuous-data elements. This linking
is accomplished through the transition equation of the sampled-and-hold
element. From Fig. 5-32, the transition equation of the sampled-and-hold
element is
Also,
h(t) = x3(to)
e(to) = e(kT) = r(to) — x₁(to) = r(kT) — x₁(to)
(5-172)
(5-173)
The transition signal flow graph of the entire sampled-data system is the
composition of the flow graphs of Figs. 5-28 and 5-33a through the use of
Eqs. (5-172) and (5-173). The complete transition flow graph of the system
is shown in Fig. 5-33b. Using Mason's gain formula, the transition equations
are written directly in the Laplace domain. [r, x,(to), x(to), and x,(kT) are
the input nodes.]
-
ao
|x₁(to)
1
= [+} − 36 + 1)] + (46) + 5 + 1) +2(4)
X, (5) (3
(s+1)
S
αι
+
a) ab) x (kT)
s² (s + 1)
+
ao
s(s x2 (to)
5(5
s² (s + 1) r(kT)
(5-174)

Sec. 5.5
141
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
X₂(s)
=
ao
1
s(s + 1) x1 (to) + 5 + 1x2 (to)
αι
+
-
aobi
15ª¹ xs (kT) +
s(s + 1)
ao
s(s + 1) r(kT)
(5-175)
h(t) = x3(kT)
=
-
-
ax₁(to) + (a₁ ab₁)x¸(kT) + a。r(kT)
(5-176)
x(k+1)T=-x₁(to) — b₁x(kT) + r(kT)
-
(5-177)
Taking the inverse Laplace transform in Eqs. (5-174) and (5-175) and letting
to = kT, the transition equations are obtained as follows:
-
--
x₁[(k + 1)T] = [1 − a。(T − 1 + e¯")].x,(kT) + (1 − e−¹)x2(kT)
-
+ (a, — ab₁) (T − 1 + e¯¹)x₁(kT)
-
+ a(T-1+e-T)r(kT)
-
-
x₂[(k + 1)T] = — a。(1 − e−¹)x, (kT) + e¯x₂(kT)
+(a、 − ab₁)(1 − e−)x(kT)
(5-178)
+ a(1-e)r(kT)
(5-179)
x3(kT)
= -
-
ax₁(kT) + (a₁ — ab₁)x¸(kT) + a。r(kT)
(5-180)
-
-
(5-181)
x₁[(k + 1)T] = − x₁(kT) — b₁x¸(kT)
Note that since the state variable x3 (kT) does not appear in the transition
equations of Eqs. (5-178), (5-179), and (5-181), Eq. (5-180) is not needed
in obtaining the solution.
Response of Sampled-Data Systems Between Sampling Instants
The state-variable method may be readily applied to the evaluation
of system response between sampling instants. From the studies in
the previous sections, the state-transition equations of a sampled-
data system may be written in the vector-matrix form as
x(t) =Y(t to)x(to) + O(t − to)r(to)
-
(5-182)
For uniform-rate sampling, if only the response at the sampling
instants is desired, we let t = kT + T, and since to kT, t − to = T.
Equation (5-182) reads
=
----
(5-183)
x[(k + 1)T] = Y(T)x(kT) + O(T) r(kT)
However, if the response at t = kT + AT, where AT <T, is desired,
we simply substitute t = kT + AT and t to = AT into Eq. (5-
182). We have
-
x(kT+AT) = Y(AT)x(kT) + O(AT) r(kT) (5-184)
For example, the response of the system in Example 5-5 at t = kT
and t = kT + AT is given by the following transition equations:
-AT
x₁(kT+AT) = (2 AT — e¹¹)x₁(kT)
-
-
+ (1 − e¯¹¹) x2(kT) +(AT − 1 + e¯¹¹)r(kT)
(5-185)

142
Chap. 5
BLOCK DIAGRAM, SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH, AND MATRIX REPRESENTATION
x(kT) = (2
--
Te¯¹)x₁(kT) + (1 − e¯¹)x2(kT)
+ (T− 1 + e¯¹)r(kT)
(5-186)
REFERENCES
Ash, R., Kim, W. E., and Kranc, G. M., "A General Flow Graph Technique
for the Solution of Multiloop Sampled Systems," Trans. of A. S. M. E.,
Journal of Basic Engineering, June 1960, pp. 360-370.
Bashkow, T. R., "The A Matrix, a New Network Description," I. R. E., Trans.
on Circuit Theory, Vol. CT-4, September 1957, pp. 117-120.
Friedland, B., “A Technique for the Analysis of Time Varying Sampled-
Data Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 75, Part 2, 1956, pp. 407–414.
Gilbert, E. O., "A Method for the Symbolic Representation and Analysis of
Linear Periodic Feedback Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., Part 2 79, 1960, pp.
512-523.
Kalman, R. E., and Bertram, J. E., “A Unified Approach to the Theory of
Sampling Systems," Journal of Franklin Inst., 267, May 1959, pp. 405-436.
Kuo, B. C., "Composite Flow Graph Technique for the Solution of Multiloop,
Multisampler, Sampled Systems," I.R.E., Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol.
AC-6, 1961, pp. 343-344.
Lendaris, G. G., and Jury, E. I., "Input-Output Relationships for Multiple
Sampled-Loop Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 79, Part 2, January 1960, pp.
375-385.
Salzer, J. M., "Signal Flow Techniques for Digital Compensation," Proc.
Computers in Control Systems Conference, October 1957.
Salzer, J. M., “Signal Flow Reductions in Sampled-Data Systems," I. R. E.,
WESCON Convention Record, Part 4, 1957, pp. 166-170.
Sun, C. H., "Matrix Solution of Nonlinear Sampled-Data Control Systems,"
Ph. D Dissertation, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, 1961.
Tou, J. T., "Simplified Technique for the Determination of Output Transforms
of Multiloop, Multisampler, Variable-rate Discrete-data Systems," Proc. of
the I. R. E., 49, March 1961, pp. 646-647.

6
TIME RESPONSE OF
SAMPLED-DATA
CONTROL SYSTEMS
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Like the analysis of systems with continuous data, the study of
the transient response of sampled-data systems is extremely important.
In general, the output response of a sampled-data system can be
separated into two parts: the steady-state response and the transient
response. Since all physical systems contain inertia and friction, the
output response before the steady-state is reached does not follow
the reference input signal at all times. The deviation between the
actual output and the desired output is termed the error signal or,
generally, the actuating signal. Again, as in the study of continuous-
data systems, the transient behavior of a sampled-data system is
described by such terms as overshoot, rise time, delay time, settling
time, damping ratio, damping factor, natural undamped frequency,
etc. The definitions of some of these terms are given in Fig. 6-1.
The transient response also indicates the relative stability of the
system. The steady-state error of a system is defined as the error
between input and output signals when steady state is reached.
Although theoretically a steady-state-error-free system exists, all
physical systems do in practice have a certain amount of error in the
steady-state operation because of inherent properties of feedback and
friction.
143

144
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
c(1)4
Unit-step
input
Maximum overshoot
1.05
1.0-
0.95
0.90-
0.5
O.I
1
max
delay
Ts
settling
time
time
-T, rise time
Fig. 6-1 Time response of sampled-data system to unit-step input
showing the time domain performance criteria.
A brief outline of the subjects covered in this chapter follows:
(1) Time Response of Systems with Typical Test Input Signals.
Unfortunately, the actual input excitations of feedback control
systems are not known ahead of time so that conventional analysis.
and design techniques require the assumption of some basic test
signals such as the step, ramp, parabolic, and sinusoidal functions as
system inputs. In studies of transient response the step response is
of importance because, as shown in Fig. 6-1, the performance criteria
in the time domain are all defined with respect to a step displace-
ment type of input. In the next section, we shall investigate the
transient behavior of a simple linear closed-loop system with and
without sampling. As was mentioned in Chapter 1, the main advan-
tage of sampling is to gain sensitivity and to achieve time sharing
of equipments. However, just as in any servo application, we should
expect to pay some kind of penalty for the desirable feature we
gain. Therefore, in the first part of this chapter, we shall compare
the performances of a continuous-data system and the same system
with sampling. The effect of variation of sampling frequency upon
transient response and system stability will also be investigated.
(2) Stability Analysis.
Various methods of testing system stability will be discussed. In
continuous-data systems the most useful methods have been the Routh-
Hurwitz criterion, the Nyquist criterion, and the root locus plot. We
shall see in this chapter, how these methods can be extended to the
studies of sampled-data control systems. The Nyquist criterion, how-
ever, will be covered in Chapter 7.

Sec. 6.2
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 145
(3) The z-Plane Technique.
We know that the poles and zeros of the transfer function in the
s-plane completely define the performance of a continuous-data system.
However, in the studies of sampled-data systems, concentration is
centered on the z-plane. By means of the root locus plot in the z-
plane, we shall see how the pole-zero configurations affect the time
response of sampled-data systems.
(4) Steady-State Errors.
By means of the final-value theorem for z-transforms, the steady-
state error of a sampled-data system can be evaluated for a specific
input signal. However, the z-transform method specifies the error
only at the sampling instants. For systems with no hidden oscillations
between sampling instants, z-transform analysis is quite adequate.
6.2 COMPARISON OF TRANSIENT RESPONSES OF
CONTINUOUS-DATA AND SAMPLED-DATA
SYSTEMS
Let us consider the simple continuous-data system shown in Fig.
6-2. For a unit-step displacement input, the output transform of the
system is
C(s) =
K
s(s² + s + K)
(6-1)
A 50 per cent damping system (damping ratio = 0.5) is obtained
when K is equal to unity. Assuming zero initial conditions, the unit-
step response of the system is obtained by taking the inverse Laplace
transform of Eq. (6-1); thus
c(t) = 11.157e-0. sin (0.866t + 60°)
(6-2)
The response c(t) is plotted in Fig. 6-5 as a function of time. We
see from the plot that the maximum overshoot of the system is ap-
proximately 16 percent.
Now, let us consider that error sampling is employed in the system
of Fig. 6-2. The same system now with sampled-data in the error
R(s)
E(s)
|G(s) =
K
s(s+1)
K=1
-C(s)
H(s) = 1
Fig. 6-2 Closed-loop system with continuous-data.

146
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
C(z)
R(s)
R(z)+
E(s) E*(s)
1
C(s)
G(s) =
T E(z)
s(s+1)
H(s) = 1
Fig. 6-3 Closed-loop system with sampled-data.
channel is shown in Fig. 6-3. The output transform of such a system.
configuration is given in the last chapter in Eq. (5-17) as
C*(s) =
G*(s)
1+HG*(s)
R* (s)
and the z-transform of the output is given by Eq. (5-18) as
C(x) =
G(z)
1+ HG(z)
R(2)
(6-3)
(6-4)
For the transfer functions previously chosen for the continuous
system, the z-transforms of G(s) are found in Table 4-1. Therefore,
G(x)=
1
=
z(1 − e)
s(s + 1) (≈ − 1)(x − e¯T)
(6-5)
Since H(s) = 1, HG(z) is also given by Eq. (6-5). For a unit-step
displacement input,
R(z)
Z
=
-
2 1
Substituting Eqs. (6-5) and (6-6) into Eq. (6-4) yields
C(z) =
22(1
z²(1 e-T)
-
-T
(z − 1)(z – 2 zenten)
(6-6)
(6-7)
Let us assume that the sampling period T is one second. Eq. (6-7)
becomes
0.63222
C(z)
=
(≈ − 1)(2² — 0.736x + 0.368)
(6-8)
By means of long division, Eq. (6-8) is now expanded into a power
series in z':
C(z) = 0.632z¹ +1.0962-2 +1.205x-3+ 1.12%¹
+1.01425 + 0.982-6 +
The inverse z-transform of C(z) is
-
-
(6-9)
...
c* (t) = 0.6328(t − T)+ 1.0968(t2T) + 1.2058(t − 3T),
-
+1.128(t - 4T) + 1.0148(t − 5T)
+0.988(6T) + . . .
(6-10)

Sec. 6.2
147
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
The output sequence c(nT) is drawn in Fig. 6-5 together with the
output response of the continuous-data system. The continuous out-
put response of the sampled-data system is estimated by connecting
the discrete output sequence by a smooth curve. Strictly speaking,
the modified z-transform should be used to determine the response
between sampling instants. However, in this simple system, the ap-
proximation by a smooth curve made here is quite good since the
sampling frequency is substantially higher than the natural frequency
of the system.
A comparison of the sampled-data system response with the re-
sponse of the continuous-data system shows that the sampling oper-
ation has caused a decrease in rise time, but the overshoot is in-
creased. The responses also show that the sampled system has faster
oscillation and a slightly shorter settling time. In general, the effect
of sampling is that of reducing the system stability. However,
sampling of the error signal does improve the stability of systems
with transportation lags.
In the above investigation we have arbitrarily chosen K to have
a value of unity. When the value of K is increased to 5, the effect
on the transient response of the sampled-data system is interesting.
If the sampling period is still one second, the output z-transform for
K = 5 becomes
3.16x2
C(x) =
(≈ − 1)(x² ·
-
z + 0.368)
(6-11)
which is expanded into the following series in z¹:
C(z) = 3.162¹ +6.32x² + 8.32z-³
+9.17% + 9.24x5 + ...
(6-12)
If enough terms are carried out in the above series, we can show
that the series actually diverges, which means that the system is
unstable. (As will be proved in the next section, the marginal value
of K for system stability when T = 1 sec in this case is 4.32.) This
again shows that the effect of sampling generally is to reduce the
margin of stability. We recall a well known fact for the second-order
system with continuous-data as shown in Fig. 6-2: the system is
always stable for all positive values of K. However, with sampling
operation in the error channel, even a second-order system may be-
come unstable for a relatively low value of K.
A zero-order hold is now inserted in the forward path of the
system in Fig. 6-3. The sampled-data system with zero-order hold is
shown in Fig. 6-4. The output z-transform C(z) of the system is
derived as follows: The closed-loop pulse transfer function is

148
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Τ
C(z)
R(s)
R(z)+
E(s)
E*(s) 1-6-ST
C(s)
1
G(s)=
S
E(z)
s(s+1)
Gro(s)
1.6
c(t)
c*(†)
1.4
ཙ
H(s)=1
Fig. 6-4 Sampled-data system with zero-order hold.
1.2
1
Second order system with sampled-data
and zero-order hold
Second order system with sampled -data
and no hold device
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Second order system with continuous-data
(166)
い
​1
O
1
2
3
4
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Time (sec)
15 16 17
Fig. 6-5 System outputs of systems in Figs. 6–2, 6–3, and 6-4.
C*(s)
=
GOG*(s)
R* (s) 1 + GLOG*(s)
Taking the z-transform on both sides of Eq. (6-13) yields
where
=
C(x) GhoG(z)
R(2)
GreG(x) = 3 [(1 −
S
1 + GoG(z)
= (1-2) 3
ST
K
s(s +
) ( (41))]
K
(1)]
s² (s
1
-
(6-13)
(6-14)
= K(1 − x ¯
-
)
3
1
( + + 1)
1
(6-15)
s

Sec. 6.3
149
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
From the z-transform table we have
GhoG(z) = K(1
―
ざり​し​て
​Tz
2
- 1)2
-
Z
1
-
Z
+
-
(6-16)
For T = 1 sec, and K = 1, Eq. (6-16) is simplified to the following
form:
(0.3682 +0.264)
GhoG(z) =
-
(≈ 1)(≈ 0.368)
-
(6-17)
Substituting Eq. (6-17) into Eq. (6-14) when R(z) = x/(x − 1), the
z-transform of the output response is
C(z)
=
-
z(0.3682 + 0.264)
z − 1)(x² z + 0.632)
(6-18)
By means of long division the output z-transform C(z) is expanded
into a power series in z¹. Thus
-3
C(z) = 0.368z+1.00z² + 1.40z³ + 1.40x+1.15%-5
-6 +0.80 z -7
-8
9
+ 0.90z
+0.862 + 0.97 z +1.05 x 10
+ 1.06z¯¹¹ + 1.01z¯¹ 12 + 0.96x-13 +
-11
-
...
(6-19)
The inverse z-transform of C(z) is obtained from Eq. (6-19) in
the usual manner and is plotted in Fig. 6-5. A comparison of the
output responses of the sampled-data systems with and without hold
circuit shows that the zero-order hold causes a longer delay time
and higher peak overshoot (over 40 percent) in the step response.
With the zero-order hold, it also takes a longer time for the transient
response to settle. The trend towards higher overshoot and oscilla-
tion in the system with hold device is expected, since the addition
of the hold circuit is equivalent to adding phase lag in the system.
and since it is well known that phase lag usually has an adverse
effect on the stability of feedback control systems.
6.3 STABILITY OF SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
In the studies of linear feedback control systems with continuous
signals, we have always kept in mind that the most important per-
formance criterion of all is over-all system stability. If a system is
unstable, then to speak of its transient or steady-state response would
be insignificant, since the system is virtually useless unless it is first
stabilized by some means of compensation. Based on the information
we have obtained from the illustrative examples given in the last
section, we shall expect the problem of stability to be more acute in
control systems with sampled-data, since the sampling operation
usually undermines system stability.

150
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
In words, the stability of a linear continuous-data system is de-
fined as: A system is stable if for any bounded input, the corresponding
output is also bounded. Logically, this same definition should also be
carried over to linear systems with sampled-data, especially since
most sampled-data systems do have output responses that are contin-
uous functions of time. However, the analysis and design of sampled-
data systems have relied to a great extent on the z-transform tech-
nique, which provides information on responses only at the sampling
instants in the form of c*(t) or c(nT). Therefore, the stability tests
of sampled-data systems are usually conducted with respect to the
output pulse sequence rather than with the actual output signal.
However, the stability analysis based on the z-transform method will
lead to erroneous results if the system response contains hidden
oscillations of the form shown in Fig. 6-6. In this case, the pulse
sequence occurring at the sampling instants converges, but the actual
c(1)
c(nT)
AAAAA
5T 6T
8T
Fig. 6-6 Hidden oscillation in output response of sampled-data
system.
C(1)
C(z)
R(s)
r(1)
C(s)
R(s)
R*(s)
c(1)
G(s)
G(s)
c(1)
r(t) T
(1)
C(s)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6-7 Continuous- and sampled-data systems.
Usually, a perfect integrator or velocity servomechanism is considered as an
ception to this definition.
ex-

Sec. 6.3
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 151
time response is unbounded. In such a case, modified z-transform or
the submultiple-sampling method should be used.
Let us now consider the continuous and the sampled-data systems
shown in Fig. 6-7. The stability of the continuous system is com-
pletely determined by the location of the poles of G(s) in the complex
s-plane. For a stable system all the poles of G(s) must lie in the
left-half s-plane; if at least one of the poles of G(s) is found in the
right-half of the s-plane, the system is unstable. This can readily be
seen from the inverse Laplace transform of G(s); a pole of G(s)
with positive real part corresponds to a rising exponential function
in the time domain. If we assume that for the sampled-data system
in Fig. 6-7b there are no hidden oscillations in the system and thus
that z-transform method is applicable, the system is said to be stable
if the output sequence c(nT) is bounded for a bounded input. There-
fore, for a bounded c(nT), the corresponding actual response c(t)
(whatever form c(t) may take) must also be bounded, and its
Laplace transform C(s) must have poles only in the left-half s-plane.
As was shown in Sec. 4-5, the z-transformation maps the left-half
of the s-plane into the interior of the unit circle in the z-plane.
Therefore, the z-transform of the response c(t) must have all its
poles located inside the unit circle in the z-plane. Since C(z) is a
product of R(z) and G(z), we can now say that the stability of the
sampled-data system depends entirely on the pole location of the z-
transfer function G(z) because the input is assumed to be bounded.
For a stable system, the poles of G(z) must not be found in the
region outside the unit circle in the z-plane. The regions of stability
in the s-plane and the z-plane are depicted in Fig. 6-8. In the s-plane
the regions of stability and instability are separated by the imaginary
axis, whereas in the z-plane they are separated by the unit circle
z = 1. Poles of G(z) of the system in Fig. 6-7b that are on the
unit circle in the z-plane will give rise to sustained oscillation in
the output response.
Let us now consider a closed-loop sampled-data system of the form
shown in Fig. 6-9. Based on the discussions above, the closed-loop
system will be stable if the poles of the closed-loop z-transfer func-
tion C(z)/R(z) are all located inside the unit circle in the z-plane.
In other words, the roots of the characteristic equation.
1 + HG(z) = 0
(6-20)
must all lie inside the unit circle. Or, if z represents the roots of
Eq. (6-20), then the closed-loop sampled-data system is stable if and
only if all the zi's satisfy
21 < 1
(6-21)
200

152
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
jw
Im z
s-plane
Stable
region
Unit circle
Unstable
region
Stable
region
Stable
region
Unstable
region
Unstable
region
z-plane
Unstable
region
Re z
Unstable
region
Fig. 6-8 Regions of stability in the s-plane and the z-plane.
C(z)
R(s)
E(s)
E*(s)
C(s)
G(s)
G(z)
Fig. 6-9 Simple closed-loop sampled-data system.
At this time, we shall investigate the possible ways of testing the
stability of a sampled-data control system. We recall that for contin-
uous-data feedback control systems, system stability may be investi-
gated by use of one of the following five well-known methods:
(1) The Routh-Hurwitz Criterion: Determines whether any roots
of the characteristic equation lie in the right-half of the s-plane.
(2) The Nyquist Criterion: Investigates whether or not the open
loop transfer function plot encircles the (-1, j0) point in the G-
plane and hence determines the difference between the number of
poles and zeros of the closed-loop transfer function that are in the
right-half s-plane.
(3) The Bode plot: This may be used to determine whether or
not any real frequency exists at which the open-loop gain is greater
than 0 db when the phase shift is greater than 180 deg.
(4) Decibels of G as a Function of Phase Shift of G: This is a
plot of the magnitude of G in db versus the phase shift of G. From
this plot the absolute stability as well as the relative stability (meas-
ured by phase and gain margins) of the closed-loop system may be

Sec. 6.4
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 153
investigated. By superimposing this plot upon the Nichols chart, the
frequency response of the closed-loop system may be obtained.
(5) The Root Locus Plot: The root locus diagram indicates graph-
ically the location of the roots of the characteristic equation when
the open-loop gain K of the system is varied.
We shall see that the stability analysis of sampled-data systems
does not depend on the derivation of a wealth of new techniques at
all. As a matter of fact, with some modifications each of the tech-
niques mentioned above can be used to study the stability of sampled-
data control systems. The only new techniques that are introduced
solely for the purpose of studying stability of sampled-data systems
are the Schur-Cohn criterion, and Jury's criteriont which are counter-
parts of the Routh-Hurwitz criterion for continuous-data systems.
The Routh-Hurwitz test determines the root location of a polynomial
with constant coefficients (in s) with respect to the imaginary axis
in the s-plane, whereas the Schur-Cohn test and Jury's test provide
information on the whereabouts of the roots of a polynomial in z
with respect to the unit-circle in the z-plane.
In the following sections of this chapter, the Schur-Cohn criterion,
the modified Routh-Hurwitz criterion, Jury's criterion, and the root
locus plots will be discussed.
6.4 THE SCHUR-COHN STABILITY CRITERION
As has been shown in the preceding section, a sampled-data
system is stable if all the roots of the system characteristic equation
lie inside the unit circle in the z-plane. A test for the locations of
the roots of a polynomial in z with respect to the unit circle can.
be made by use of the Schur-Cohn criterion. In general, if the
characteristic equations of linear sampled-data systems are described
by
F(x) = anz" + An-12"-¹ + ... + a₂ z² + a₁ z + α。 0 (6-22)
where ao, a1, a2,
an are either real or complex coefficients, the
Schur-Cohn criterion may be stated as follows:
A sampled-data system is stable (all the characteristic equation
roots lie inside the unit circle) if and only if the sequence of "Schur-
Cohn determinants"-1, A1, A2, A3, . . Ak, . . . An-has n variations
† M. Marden, "The Geometry of the Zeros of a Polynomial in a Complex Variable,”
Chapter 10, (New York: American Mathematical Society, 1949).
E. I. Jury, J. Blanchard, "A Stability Test for Linear Discrete Systems in Table
Form," I. R. E. Proc., 49, No. 12, Dec. 1961, pp. 1947-48.

154 TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 6
in signs; the kth Schur-Cohn determinant is defined as
ao
0
0
0
an
An-1
a1
ao
0
0
0 an
a2
a1
ao
An-k+1
An-k+2
an
(6-23)
āk-1
āk-2
0
āk-3
ao
0
0
ak-1
Ak-2
Ak-3
Ак
ān
ān-1
010
0
0
ān 0
0
ān-2 ān-1
an
0
1800
18 18
ān-k+1 ān-k+2 Ān-k+3
ān 0 0
ão
where k = 1, 2, 3, . . ., n, and a is the conjugate of ak. Note that
when all the coefficients of the polynomial are real, the determinant
▲ is symmetrical with respect to its principal diagonal. The stability
criterion can also be stated as: A sampled-data system is stable when
all its characteristic equation roots lie inside the unit circle in the
z-plane provided that the coefficients of the equation satisfy the
following conditions:
Ak <0 for k odd
Ak > 0 for k even)
(6-24)
However, if the conditions stated in Eq. (6-24) are not satisfied,
then the characteristic equation has at least one root that falls out-
side the unit circle. Unlike the Routh-Hurwitz criterion, the Schur-
Cohn test does not indicate in any definite manner how many roots
are outside the unit circle: nor does it tell if any of the roots are
located on the unit circle.
Example 6-1
by
Consider that the characteristic equation of a sampled-data system is given
(6-25)
equation are determined as follows:
(2z − 1)(z + 2)
=
2~2 + 3≈ 2 = 0
The Schur-Cohn determinants of this
ao
an
2
A
ān āo
2
―
21-0
(6-26)
Immediately, we know that Eq. (6-25) has at least one root located outside
the unit circle in the z-plane, since A, is not less than zero.
The determinant A, is written
2
ao 0
an an-1
--
2
0
a1
ao
0
an
3
-
A2
ān
0
āo ā¹
2
ān-1 ān 0
ão
3
202
323 2
- 2
---
0 - 2
202 O
144 (6-27)

Sec. 6.4
155
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Thus, the sequence of Schur-Cohn determinants reads: 1, 0,
144, which
has only one change in sign (where for the second-order system to be stable,
there should be two changes in sign). From the given characteristic equation
in Eq. (6-25), we know that the roots are at z = 1/2 and z = = 2; the latter
is located outside the unit circle.
Example 6-2
by
Consider that the characteristic equation of a sampled-data system is given
(≈ + 1)(≈ + 0.5)(≈ + 2)
=
~3 + 3.5~2 + 3.5~ +1 =0 (6-28)
From the last equation we know that one root is inside the unit circle, one
is right on the unit circle, and one is outside the circle. The Schur-Cohn
determinants of this equation are determined as follows:
Δι
=
= 0
(6-29)
1
0 1
3.5
3.5
1
0
1
D2
=
0
(6-30)
1
0
1
3.5
3.5
1
0 1
1
0
0
1
3.5
3.5
3.5 1
0 0
1
3.5
3.5 3.5 1
0
0
1
A3
= 0
(6-31)
1
0
0
1
3.5
3.5
3.5 1
0 0 1 3.5
1
3.5 3.5 1 0 0
Thus, the sequence of Schur-Cohn determinants reads: 1, 0, 0, 0, and the
stability criterion is not met. However the test says only that not all of the
roots of the characteristic equation are inside the unit circle. No conclusion
can be made on how many roots are in the region outside the unit circle or
on the unit circle.
From these two examples, we see that the application of the
Schur-Cohn stability criterion is not nearly as convenient as the
Routh-Hurwitz test ordinarily used for continuous-data systems. First
of all, for higher order systems the use of the Schur-Cohn test relies
on the evaluation of higher order determinants. There does not seem
to be any simple way of tabulating the equation coefficients so that
stability condition can be investigated without manipulating with the
determinants. Certainly, the attractiveness of the Routh-Hurwitz
criterion is due in part to the fact that the equation coefficients of
the continuous-data system can be tabulated into the form of the
Routh tabulation and then stability condition is obtained simply by
manipulation of the coefficients of the tabulation. Furthermore, the

156 TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 6
Routh's test will give the number of roots that are in the right-half
of the s-plane and also will tell whether any root exists on the
imaginary axis, whereas the Schur-Cohn test tells only whether all
the roots are inside the unit circle in the z-plane.
6.5 JURY'S STABILITY TEST
A stability test which is simpler than the Schur-Cohn test pro-
cedure is devised by Jury and Blanchard. The method is presented
below without proof.
Referring to the polynomial of Eq. (6-22) with an > 0, the first
step in Jury's stability test is the formation of the following table
using the coefficients of the polynomial:
n-k
Row
༧°
z¹
z²
2n-1
z"
1
ao
αν
a2
an-k
An-1
an
2
an
An-1
An-2
Ak
ai
8
ao
3
bo
9
b₁
b2
bn-k
bn-1
45
4
bn-i bn-
bn-3
bk
•
bo
5
Co
C1
C2
Cn-2
Co
6
Cn-2 Cn-3 Cn-4
•
2n
-
5 Po
Pi P2 P3
2n
-
4 P3 P2
Pi
Ро
2n
-
3 qo qi
92
Note that the elements of row 2k + 2 consist of the coefficients of
the row 2k + 1 written in reverse order. The elements in the table
are defined as
ao
An-k
bk
-
an
ak
Co
Cn-2-k
dk
Cn-2 Ck
qo
Po P3
P3 Po
bo
Ck =
bn-1-k
bn-1 bk
Po Pi
q2
P3 P2
The necessary and sufficient conditions for the polynomial F(z)
to have no roots on and outside the unit circle in the z-plane are:
F(1) > 0 F(1)
0 n even
<0
n odd
E. I. Jury, and J. Blanchard, I. R. E. Proc., 49, pp. 1947-48.

Sec. 6.6
157
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
|ao| < an
|bo|bn-1]
| Co
Cn-2|
do > dn-3
(n
(n-1) constraints
Example 6-3
The polynomial given by Eq. (6-28) is to be tested by Jury's method.
We have F(1) = 9 > 0, but F(1) = 0, which violates the condition that
for n =
= 3 F(-1) must be less than zero. Therefore, the polynomial has at
least one root lying on or outside the unit circle.
Example 6-4
Consider the polynomial
F(z) = z¹ — 1.368≈³ + 0.4≈² + 0.08z + 0.002 = 0
The first step of the stability test finds that
F(1) = 0.114 > 0 and F(-1) = 2.69
0
(6-32)
Since n = 4 is even, these conditions satisfy the F(1) > 0 and F(-1) > 0
requirements for stability. Next, we tabulate the coefficients in the following
manner:
Row
1
23
ལས
2
3
-
0.002
1
0.08
- 1.368
0.4
- 1.368
1
0.4
0.08
0.002
1
1.368
-0.399
0.083
4
· 0.083
-
- 0.399
1.368
- 1
5
0.993
-
- 1.385
0.512
From the above tabulation, we have
1001 = 0.002 <1
1601
|ao| <a
= = 1 > 0.083
|bo| |b3|
= 0.993 0.512
|co| > | C₂ |
Since all these constraints are satisfied, the system represented by the poly-
nomial as its characteristic equation is stable.
6.6 EXTENSION OF ROUTH-HURWITZ CRITERION
TO SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
Any attempt to apply the conventional Routh-Hurwitz test to the
study of stability of sampled-data systems meets with immediate
difficulty. If we try to apply the test directly to the characteristic

158
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
equation of a sampled-data system in the s-domain, we see that the
equation is of the form 1 + HG*(s) = 0 [or 1 + G*(s)H*(s), as the
case may be] which is normally a transcendental function of s;
therefore, the Routh's test breaks down completely. Trying to apply
the Routh's test to the characteristic equation in the z-domain also
fails, since the stability boundary in the z-plane is no longer the
imaginary axis but rather is the unit circle z 1. However, if we
map the interior of the unit circle in the z-plane onto the left-half
plane of another complex variable plane by some kind of transfor-
4jw
=
▲ Im z
∞
36
s-plane
4
The primary strip
w - plane
jww
W =
-j1
z=esT
S
O
z-plane
r-plane
jwr
8
Fig. 6-10 The mapping of the primary strip in the s-plane into
the interior of the unit circle in the z-plane and the mapping
of the z-plane unit circle to the r-plane and the w-plane through
the bilinear transformations.
-j1
Re z
1

Sec. 6.6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 159
s-plane
jw
z-plane
Im z
Stable
region
Unstable
region
Stable region
Re z
Stable
region
Unstable
region
Unstable region
juw
jω,
w-plane
r-plane
Stable
region
Unstable
region
Stable
Unstable
region
region
Ow
Stable
region
Unstable
Stable
Unstable
region
region
region
Fig. 6-11 Regions of stability in the s-plane, the z-plane, the w-
plane, and the r-plane.
mation, the Routh-Hurwitz criterion may be applied again directly
to the equation in this new variable.
We shall investigate the bilinear transformation
z=
aw + b
cw + d
(6-33)
where w is a complex variable; that is, wow + jww. In Eq. (6-33)
if we set a = = b = 1, c = 1, and d
=
1, we have

160 TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 6
2=
1+ w
1
-
W
(6-34)
We shall see that Eq. (6-34) maps the interior of the unit circle in
the z-plane onto the left-half of the w-plane. For the purpose of
identification of this process, we shall call Eq. (6-34) the "w-trans-
formation." However, if in Eq. (6-33) a = b = 1 but c = 1 and d =
-1, the bilinear transformation also maps the inside of the z-plane
unit circle into the left-half of the w-plane. To distinguish this case
from the previous one, we use another complex variable, r, so that
2=
+1
1
(6-35)
which is called the "r-transformation." The mappings of the primary
strip in the s-plane into the unit circle of the z-plane and then from
z to the r and w planes by the r and w transformations are shown
in Fig. 6-10. If all the periodic strips in the s-plane are considered,
the z-transformation maps the entire left-half of the s-plane into the
interior of the unit circle in the z-plane; the r or the w transfor-
mation then maps the inside of the z-plane unit circle onto the en-
tire left-half of the r or the w plane. This is illustrated in Fig. 6-11.
As far as the application of the Routh-Hurwitz criterion is con-
cerned, either the w- or the r-transformation may be used; we can
easily see that no real advantage is gained by choosing one trans-
formation over the other. Both transformations will convert the orig-
inal characteristic equation in z into a quotient of two polynomials
in either r or w of the same order. In order to be consistent, the
r-transformation is used here exclusively as the medium for the ap-
plication of the Routh-Hurwitz criterion to sampled-data systems.
As will be shown later in the discussion on frequency domain design
of sampled-data systems, for certain types of systems the use of the
r-transformation may lead to simpler solutions, whereas for other
types of systems the design may be more straightforward if the w
transformation is used.
The determination of stability of sampled-data systems by use of
the r-transformation is illustrated by the following examples:
Example 6-5
Consider the characteristic equation given by Eq. (6-28), which is repeated
in the following:
(≈ + 1)(≈ + 0.5)(≈ + 2)
=
23 +3.522 + 3.5% + 1 0
(6-36)
Substituting the r-transformation of Eq. (6-35) into the last equation, we have
3
2
( ± 1)² + 3.5 ( + 1)² + 3.5 (7 ± 1) -
+ 1 = 0
(6-37)

Sec. 6.6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 161
which is simplified to
97.3
r = 0
(6-38)
In this case the roots of Eq. (6-38) can be obtained by mere inspection, and
thus the Routh's test need not be applied. The roots of Eq. (6–38) are r = 0,
r =
-
}, and r = 3. The roots of the characteristic equation in the z-plane
and the r-plane are sketched in Fig. 6-12.
z-plane
Stable
root
Im z
jur
r-plane
1
Re z
2
Stable
Unstable
Unstable
roots
root
roots
Fig. 6-12 Roots of Eqs. (6-36) and (6-38) in the z-plane and
the r-plane, respectively.
Example 6-6
Let the open-loop transfer function of a unity-feedback control system with
sampled-error signal be
22.57
G(s)
=
s² (s + 1)
Let the sampling period be one second; the z-transform of G(s) is
(6-39)
G(z) =
22.57≈(0.3632 +0.264)
(≈ − 1)² (≈ — 0.368)
(6-40)
The characteristic equation of the system is given by the numerator of
which is
1 + G(≈) = 0
23+ 5.9422 + 7.7z
0.368
-
0
(6-41)
(6-42)
Substituting the r-transformation of Eq. (6-35) into Eq. (6-42) yields
3
2
(+1)+5.94)
94 (~ + 1)² + + 7.7(1) - 0.368 = 0
r
The last equation is simplified to
14.27r3³ +2.3r2 11.74r + 3.13 = 0
-
(6-43)
(6-44)
By inspection we see that Eq. (6-44) has a negative coefficient, and since
the necessary conditions for a polynomial to have no root with positive real
part are that all its coefficients must be of the same sign and none of the
coefficients may vanish, we know that Eq. (6-44) must have at least one root
in the right-half of the r-plane. This fact means that Eq. (6-42) must have
at least one root outside the unit circle in the z-plane and that the system is

162 TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 6
unstable. But just for the purpose of illustrating the application of the Routh-
Hurwitz criterion, we make the following Routh's tabulation using the coeffi-
cients of Eq. (6-44):
доз
7-2
14.27
2.3
11.74
3.13
―
pol
- 27 44.6
= 31.1
2.3
0
7-0
3.13
Since there are two changes of sign in the first column of the last tabulation,
the characteristic equation in Eq. (6-44) has two roots located in the right-
half of the r-plane. This corresponds to having two roots outside the unit
circle in the z-plane for Eq. (6-42). This result can be checked by solving
Eq. (6-42); the three roots are at z = - 2, z = - 3.97, and z = 0.032. When
mapped into the r-plane, the three corresponding roots are at r = }, r = 0.6,
1.07. The z-plane roots and the r-plane roots are illustrated in
-
and r =
Fig. 6-13.
-
Im z
jær
z-plane
r-plane
Unit circle
0.33
*
- 3.97
0.032
Re z
*
-1.07
16.6
Unstable
roots
Stable
root
Stable
root
Unstable
roots
Fig. 6-13 The roots of the characteristic equation of Example
6-6 sketched in the z-plane and the r-plane.
Example 6-7
In this example the Routh-Hurwitz criterion is applied to the sampled-data
system in Fig. 6-3. As has been shown in Sec. 6.2, for a sampling period of
one second, the system is stable for K = 1, but is unstable for K = 5. The
marginal value of K for a stable operation in this case is apparently between
1 and 5. The Routh's test will be used here to investigate the variation of
the marginal value of K as the sampling period T is varied. The character-
istic equation of the system with K and T unspecified is written
≈² + [K(1 − e−¹) − (1 + e¯T)]z + e¯T :
-e
By use of the r-transformation, Eq. (6-45) is converted to
0
(6-45)
Kr² + 2r+
2(1+e-")
1-
-
- K = 0
(6-46)

Sec. 6.6
163
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
The Routh's tabulation of the last equation is as follows:
7.2
K
2
7-0
2(1 +
-
-
- K
2(1 + e-T)
1-e-T
-
- K
1
The Routh-Hurwitz criterion says that a system is stable if all the ele-
ments in the first column of the Routh's tabulation are positive. Therefore,
for the system to be stable, the following conditions are desired:
and
K> 0
K < 2 (1 + e-7)
1- e-T
(6-47)
The conditions of stability given by Eq. (6-47) are plotted in Fig. 6-14; the
unstable values of K and T are indicated by the shaded region. One point of
special interest is that when T is equal to one second, the marginal value of
K for stability is 4.32. When the sampling period is increased (slower sam-
pling rate), the plot in Fig. 6-14 shows that the marginal value of K is de-
creased, thus proving that in this system sampling does reduce system stability.
K
8.17
Unstable region
Stable
region
4.32
2.63
2.21
I
1
2
3
T (sec)
Fig. 6-14 Marginal values of K for stability as a function of the
sampling period T of the system shown in Fig. 6-3.
As a closing remark to this section, we can say that the stability
study of sampled-data systems by use of the bilinear r-transformation
and the Routh-Hurwitz criterion is quite straightforward in prin-
ciple. In transforming from the z to the r domain, the degree of the
polynomial is not increased (it may actually be reduced if the orig-
inal polynomial has roots at z = 1). However, in the case of high-
order systems, the work involved in simplifying the polynomial in
r before applying the Routh's test is quite tedious.

164
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
6.7 EFFECT OF POLE-ZERO CONFIGURATION OF
C* (8) IN THE S-PLANE AND C(z) IN THE Z-PLANE
UPON SYSTEM TRANSIENT BEHAVIOR
We know that the Routh-Hurwitz criterion tests only the absolute
stability of a system. However, if a system is stable, the criterion
does not indicate how stable the system is. Additional information
about the time response of a stable sampled-data system at the
sampling instants must be obtained from the location of the poles
of C*(s) in the left-half of the s-plane or the poles of C(z) inside
the unit circle in the z-plane. A knowledge of the pole-zero locations
in the s-plane or the z-plane enables the designer to predict the
transient behavior of sampled-data systems.
From the studies of continuous-data systems, the correlation be-
tween the locations of the poles and zeros of C(s) in the s-plane and
the transient response of c(t) is well known. For instance, complex
conjugate poles of C(s) in the left-half s-plane give rise to sinusoidally
damped responses; poles on the negative real axis correspond to
monotonically decaying responses; and complex conjugate poles on
the imaginary axis will give rise to undamped constant-amplitude
sinusoidal oscillations. All poles in the right-half s-plane correspond
to unstable responses. Since the z-transformation is merely a map-
ping process, and the mapping of the s-plane into the z-plane has
been demonstrated in Sec. 4-3, the correlation between the pole-zero
location of C(z) in the z-plane and the transient behavior of the
sampled-data system at the sampling instants can be established
simply by investigation of the correspondence of the s-plane and the
z-plane pole-zero configurations. In regard to the pole locations of
C*(s) in the s-plane, we shall consider the following cases:
1. Poles on the Real Axis in the s-Plane
The periodic property of C*(s) has been established previously
in Chapter 2; that is, the poles of C*(s) that are located in the
primary strip of the s-plane are also duplicated in the complementary
strips. Therefore, in this case, poles of C*(s) on the real axis must
also be accompanied by complementary poles located on the hori-
zontal axes of s ojnws, where n = 1, 2, 3, . . . . The negative
real axis, together with its complementary axes of sσ ±jnws
(n = 1, 2, 3, . . .) in the s-plane, when mapped by the z-transforma-
tion correspond to the positive real axis inside the unit circle in the
z-plane. Similarly, the positive real axis and its complementary axes
=
=

Sec. 6.7
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 165
of sσjnw, (n = 1, 2, 3, . . .) in the s-plane are mapped into
the portion of the positive real axis outside the unit circle in the
z-plane. These can be shown by substituting so±jnw, into
z= est. Therefore,
Complementary
strip
Primary
strip -02
z = e(±σ±jn w,)T
=
etor
Ajw
s-plane
jws
jws/2
-1-jws/2
Complementary
-jws
*
strip
(a)
z-plane
Unit circle
Im
(6-48)
разт
Re
النا سا
(b)
Fig. 6-15 (a) Transient responses corresponding to various pole
locations of C* (s) in the s-plane (real poles only). (b) Tran-
sient sequence corresponding to various pole locations of C(x)
in the z-plane.

166
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
For region inside the left-half s-plane, Eq. (6-48) gives
z=e
(6-49)
whose magnitude is always less than unity, and thus corresponds to
the region inside the unit circle in the z-plane. For the region in the
right-half of the s-plane, Eq. (6-48) becomes
z = e+or
(6-50)
which always has a value greater than unity. Thus the right-half of
the s-plane corresponds to the exterior of the unit circle in the z-
plane. A typical set of transient behaviors due to poles of G*(s) on
the real axis in the s-plane is illustrated in Fig. 6-15a. The corres-
ponding transient behaviors described by the z-plane poles on the
positive real axis are shown in Fig. 6-15b. Consequently, we can
conclude that a uniform variation in system transient response comes
from a positive real pole of C(z) in the z-plane. Furthermore, if the
pole is inside the unit circle, the transient dies out monotonically or
the output sequence C(nT) decays uniformly; and if the pole is out-
side the unit circle, the transient increases in magnitude monotonically
and the output sequence is divergent.
2. A Pair of Complex Conjugate Poles in the Primary Strip
of the 8-Plane
Consider a pair of complex conjugate poles at sσ jw, in
σι –
the s-plane, where w₁ <ws/2. The corresponding poles in the z-plane
are at
σιτ
(6-51)
which are complex conjugate poles inside the unit circle in the z-
plane. The oscillatory transient responses due to complex conjugate
poles in the s-plane are shown in Fig. 6-16a. In this case, since it is
assumed that the sampling frequency ws is greater than twice the
frequency of the complex s-plane poles, 2w1, the output sequence
defined by the z-plane poles will also be oscillatory as shown in Fig.
6-16b. Notice that when the s-plane poles are on the imaginary axis.
at s jw, where wi<ws/2, the envelope of the output sequence is
sinusoidal with frequency w1.
=
3. Complex Conjugate Poles on the Boundaries of the
Periodic Strips in the s-Plane
-
σι
Now let us consider a pair of complex poles located at s = — σi
jos/2, where w, is the sampling frequency. The corresponding z-
plane poles are at

Sec. 6.7
167
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
jw
s-plane
Complementary
strip
jws
2
jws/2
3
Primary
strip
X1
A
X
Complementary
strip
(a)
-jws/2
-jws
KA

M
3
Im z
z-plane
Re z
1
Unit circle
(b)
Fig. 6-16 (a) Transient responses corresponding to various pole
locations of C*(s) in the s-plane (complex conjugate poles only).
(b) Transient response sequence corresponding to various pole
locations of C(z) in the z-plane.
t

168
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
A
4jw
jus
s-plane
A
jus
MA
T
-02
-0₁
(a)
jws
Im z
z-plane
t
Unit circle
MA
1
Re z
(b)
Fig. 6-17 (a) Transient responses corresponding to various pole
locations of C*(s) in the s-plane (complex conjugate poles on
the boundaries between periodic strips). (b) Transient response
sequence corresponding to various pole locations of C(z) in the
z-plane.

Sec. 6.7
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 169
2=
e-17
(6-52)
These are a pair of double poles located on the negative real axis
inside the unit circle of the z-plane. Since the s-plane poles are
complex, the envelope of the output sequence will be oscillatory.
However, in this special case, assume that w₁ = ws/2; exactly one
sample will be in each one-half period of the envelope of the out-
put sequence. Therefore, the pulses in the output sequence will occur
in alternating (positive and negative) magnitudes as shown in Fig.
6-17b.
A significant point concerning the above mentioned case is that
the sampling frequency w, is at a minimum specified by Shannon's
sampling theorem. Apparently, if the sampling is decreased from the
present value so that w₁>w./2, the sampled-data will not be able to
describe the original signal completely, and the z-transform method
becomes unreliable.
The results of the above discussion concerning the correspondence
of the transient behavior and the pole locations in the s-plane and
the z-plane for sampled systems are tabulated in Table 6-1.
TABLE 6-1
CORRESPONDENCE OF THE TRANSIENT BEHAVIOR OF SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
AND THE POLE LOCATIONS OF C*(s) IN THE s-PLANE AND C(≈) IN THE 2-PLANE
Location of poles of
C*(s) in the primary
strip of the s-plane
(1) Poles in the left-half
s-plane
Poles on the negative real
axis in the s-plane
Complex conjugate poles
in the s-plane
Complex conjugate poles
on the boundaries between
periodic strips
(2) Poles on the imagin-
ary axis in the s-plane
(3) Poles in the right-
half s-plane
Location of poles of
C(z) in the z-plane
Poles inside the unit circle
in the z-plane
Poles on the positive real
axis in the z-plane
Complex conjugate poles
inside the unit circle in
the z-plane
Double poles on the nega-
tive real axis inside the
unit-circle in the z-plane
Poles on the unit circle in
the z-plane
Poles outside the unit
circle in the z-plane
Transient behavior
of c*(t)
Stable response
Monotonically decaying
output sequence
Positively damped oscil-
latory output sequence
Decaying output sequence
with alternating (positive
and negative magnitudes)
Sustained oscillatory out-
put sequence with constant
amplitude
Unstable response
† A damped sinusoid is not a periodic function, but the maxima and the minima
of the function occur at periodic intervals of Ti
=
2πωι·

170
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
6.8 EFFECT OF THE POLE-ZERO CONFIGURATIONS
IN THE Z-PLANE UPON THE MAXIMUM
OVERSHOOT AND PEAK TIME OF TRANSIENT
RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
In the preceding section we have obtained the relationship between
the characteristic equation roots in the z-plane and the transient
response of a second-order sampled-data system. When the character-
istic equation has complex roots inside the unit circle in the z-plane,
the corresponding output response of the system will be oscillatory
with positive damping. In general, the complex roots that are inside
and are closest to the unit circle give rise to more oscillatory re-
sponses (less damped). It remains for us to determine the relation-
ships between the pole-zero configuration of the closed-loop transfer
function and the maximum overshoot and peak time (time at which
maximum overshoot occurs) of a sampled-data system.
For a simple second-order system with continuous-data, if the
closed-loop transfer function is given by
2
ω,
C(s)
R(s)
=
s² + 25 wns + wn
(6-53)
then the maximum overshoot and the peak time are given byt
and
- ζπ
1116x
1
cus, shoot & max
=
1+ exp
-
peach lime I
π
=
max
wn√1
2
-
(6-54)
(6-55)
For systems of the order higher than two, no simple relations can
be obtained between Cmax,
с Tax, and the pole-zero configuration.
However, if a system is characterized by only a pair of dominant
poles (poles of C/R that dominate the transient behavior) described
by Eq. (6-53) and if the other poles and zeros are far to the left
in the complex s-plane, the effects of these other poles and zeros on
the transient response are negligible;_c inax and Tax in this case can
still be approximated by using Eqs. (6-54) and (6-55).
For a sampled-data system, the problem of establishing the over-
shoot and peak-time-pole-zero configuration is more complex. This
is because normally when the z-transform method is used, the output
response is described only at the sampling instants. We shall select
the following model as the closed-loop z-transfer function of a second-
B. C. Kuo, Automatic Control Systems, (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall,
Inc., 1962).

Sec. 6.8
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 171
order feedback control system with sampled-data (the sampler is in
the forward path):
where
C(z)
R(z)
=
K(z-z₁)
(≈ − p₁)(z — Þ₁)
K
=
-
(1 − p₁)(1 − p₁)/(1 − ≈1)
(6-56)
(6-57)
and p is the complex conjugate of p₁. If the system does not have
a hold circuit following the sampler, the zero of Eq. (6-56) will be
located at the origin in the z-plane, whereas if the system has a
zero-order hold, the zero may lie at any place on the real axis in
the z-plane.
When the system is subject to a unit step function input, the
output transform C(z) is given by
C(z)
=
zK(z − z )
-
21)
-
(≈ − 1)(≈ − p₁)(z − P1)
(6-58)
The output response at the sampling instants is obtained by apply-
ing the inversion formula of Eq. (4-47). Thus
1
c(nT) =
2π
273 $
j
Kz(221)
(z1)(zp₁)(z p₁)
1
-
dz (6-59)
where I is a contour which encloses all the singularities of the
integrand. Applying Cauchy's residue theorem, the output sequence
c(nT) is written
c(nT) = 1 + 2
K(p₁21)
P₁" cos (no, + 0₁)
(6-60)
(p₁ − 1)(p₁ - Þ₁)
where
Φι
P₁ = arg p₁ (argument of p₁)
(6-61)
c(nT)
Cmax
Max c(nT)
C(1)
OT 2T 3T 4T 5T 67 77 87 97 IOT IIT 12T 13T
I
Tmax
Fig. 6-18 Continuous time response and output sequence of
sampled-data control system.

172
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
01
―
-
-
0₁ (p₁21)
= arg (p₁ = 21) — arg (p₁ − 1) — π/2
(6-62)
Since, as illustrated in Fig. 6-18, c(nT) describes the values of the
continuous response c(t) only at the sampling instants, the problem
of evaluating Cmax(t) from the information contained in c(nT) is a
difficult one. The likelihood that c max(t) = Max c(nT) is very small,
implying that the maximum overshoot happens to occur exactly at
a sampling instant. The determination of the maximum overshoot
and the peak time by use of c(nT) has been discussed in the litera-
ture. However, in these earlier methods, we must assume that only
two dominant poles of C/R(z) contribute significantly to the over-
shoot and peak time; all other closed-loop poles and zeros are con-
sidered to be very near to the origin of the z-plane. The method
used here is similar to the work of D. P. Lindorff; the maximum
overshoot and the peak time are computed by considering not only
the dominant quadratic poles but also the influence of a closed-loop
zero which may be located at any point on the real axis in the z-
plane.
The poles and zeros of Eq. (6-56) are now depicted in Fig. 6-19.
From the geometrical location of these poles and zeros, we define
the angle a as shown in Fig. 6-19, and a is given by
-
-
a = arg (p₁ z₁) — arg (p₁ − 1) + π/2
By use of Eq. (6-62) the angle ₁ becomes
01
=
τα
-
π
(6-63)
(6-64)
Also, we can readily show that the following relationship holds be-
tween a and the closed-loop pole-zero locations:
| sec a = 2
K(p₁ − z₁)
(p₁1)(p₁ - P₁)
-
(6-65)
where K is given in Eq. (6-57). Substituting Eqs. (6-64) and (6-65)
into Eq. (6-60), the system output sequence is written
-
c(nT) = 1 + sec a xp" cos (nÞ, ± α — п)
=
Letting t nT, then
and
n
=
| P₁|¹/T = e−5wnl
-
Þ = arg þ₁ = wT = w₂√1 − g²T
Pi
(6-66)
(6-67)
(6-68)
Therefore, a continuous function that passes through the points of
c(nT) is
† J. T. Tou, Digital and Sampled-data Control Systems, (New York: McGraw-Hill
Book Co., Inc., 1959), pp. 327-336. E. I. Jury, Sampled-data Control Systems, (New
York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1958), pp. 132-142.
D. P. Lindorff, "Application of Pole-zero Concepts to Design of Sampled-Data
Systems," I. R. E. Transactions on Automatic Control, Dec. 1959, pp. 173–184.

Sec. 6.8
173
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
-1
Im
| P₁|=e-σT
=
απθ2-γ
α=02-03+
EN
121
=
-
03=/P1-1
z-plane
P1
0.
02
1 Re
Χρι
Im
z-plane
α=γ-02
-Z1
α=-(02-03+)
02=/P1-Z1
03-/P1-1
P₁
03
Re
œ
Өг
1
X
Fig. 6-19 Geometrical representation of a for a second-order
sampled-data system with closed-loop transfer function given by
Eq. (6-56).

174
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
-
c(t) = 1 + seca et cos (w√1 — ç³t ± α — π)
(6-69)
The overshoot of c(t) will be used to characterize the actual over-
shoot of the step response of the sampled-data system whose closed-
loop transfer function is given by Eq. (6-56). The overshoot of the
response in Eq. (6-69) is determined in the usual manner; that is,
by taking the first derivative of c(t) with respect to time and setting
dc/dt equal to zero. The steps described above leads to the following
relationship:
tan (w√1 - t±α-n) =
π)
-१
- 5
√1-5²
(6-70)
Since the time t solved from the last equation is the peak time
T we have
max,
T
=
max
On'
1
1
- १
√(tan" √ α + x) (6-71)
-
Substituting Eq. (6-71) into Eq. (6–69) and simplifying, the maximum
response is written
C max
—
2
=1+1 sec a exp
a exp√1-5²
- }
१
*
1
tan
Τα+π
-
Hence, the maximum overshoot of the system response is
Overshoot
=
√1 - §² | sec a exp√1-5²
१
-1
tan
- १
1
-
(6-72)
π)
Τα+π
(6-73)
We can readily see from Eq. (6-73) that the maximum overshoot is
uniquely specified by the damping ratio and the angle a (see Fig.
6-19).
In Fig. 6-20 the percent overshoot given by Eq. (6-73) is plotted
as a function of and a. The angle a and its sign are determined
from the pole-zero location of the closed-loop transfer function as
described in Fig. 6-19. The value of can be calculated by use of
Eq. (4-26) or (4-27); that is, once the complex poles (P1, §1) of
C/R are given, we have
P₁tan y
=e
(6-74)
In the above expression, since p₁ and ₁ are obtained from the
location of Pi, y is computed readily. The damping ratio of the
complex roots is determined from.
y = sin y
The peak time is found by use of Eq. (6-71).
(6-75)
Or
T
- 5
1
Tmax
-
tan¯
Q v
√1
-
2ع
Τα+π
+ π)
(6-76)

Sec. 6.8
175
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Percent overshoot
3
1,000

500
5=0
100
C=0.1
=0.2
50
X=0.3
30
5=0.4
20
=0.5
=0.6
10
5=0.7
сл
5
2
=0.8
-90 -60 -40 -20 O +20 +40 +60 +90
α degrees
Fig. 6-20 Percent overshoot of second-order sampled-data control
systems.

176 TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 6
The curves of peak time (normalized in Tmax P1/T) are plotted in
Fig. 6-21 as functions of and a.
Note here that the time function of Eq. (6-69) closely approxi-
mates the actual time response of the system only if the sampling
frequency of the sampler is sufficiently high. In general, for the
method used here to be correct, the sampling frequency should be
equal to at least twice the natural frequency of the system. In other
words, the complex poles of C/R must be located roughly in the

250°
220°
200°
180°
160°
140°
120°
100°
80°
60°
40°
20°
0°
=0
<=0.1
Tmax $1
T
(=0.2
L8=0.3.
$=0.4
-=0.5-
(=0.6
C=0.7
=0.8
-90°-70° -50° -30° -10° 0° +10° +30° +50° +70° +90°
α
Fig. 6-21 Peak time of step response of second-order sampled-
data systems versus a.

Sec. 6.8
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 177
A
first and the fourth quadrants in the z-plane. Otherwise, the output
sequence c(nT) does not contain sufficient information about the
actual time response; consequently, the inverse transform of C(z)
produces a time function which will not be an accurate approxima-
tion of the true output response.
The curves of percent overshoot and peak time given in Figs.
6-20 and 6-21 can also be used to approximate the overshoot and
peak time of sampled-data systems with orders higher than two. In
general, the method described above is applicable to systems having
two complex dominant poles and a zero located at any point on the
real axis; all other poles and zeros are very near to the origin of
the z-plane.
Let us now consider an illustrative example using this method.

Im
-0.717
a=13°
z-plane
Ip₁l=0.8
$=51°
P₁=0.5+0.617j
Ip₁l=0.6
α=0°´
-P₁=0.368+0.48)
₁ = 53°
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
P₁
P₁
System without hold:
C(z)
=
0.632z
R(2) 22 -0.736x +0.368
System with zero-order hold:
(poles: 0.368 + j0.48)
(zero: 0)
C(x)
R(z)
0.3682 + 0.264
(poles: 0.5+j0.617)
=
Re
2 +0.632 (zero: -0.717)
Fig. 6-22 Pole-zero locations of second-order sampled-data control
system in Figs. 6-3 and 6-4.

178 TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 6
Consider the simple error-sampled-data system of Fig. 6-3. The over-
shoot and peak time of the system estimated from the z-transform
method used in Sec. 6-2 are 20 percent and 2.9 sec, respectively.
(see Fig. 6-5). From the geometrical location of the poles and zeros
of C/R depicted in Fig. 6-22, we have p₁ = 0.6, a 0°, and ₁ = 53°.
By use of Eqs. (6-74) and (6-75), the damping ratio of the quadratic
poles is found to be 0.485. Therefore, from Fig. 6-20, we found the
overshoot to be 20 percent; and from Fig. 6-21, the peak time is
approximately equal to 2.85 sec.
=
1
In a similar manner, the overshoot and peak time of the second-
order sampled-data system with zero-order hold of Fig. 6-4 are cal-
culated with reference to the pole-zero location of the closed-loop
transfer function depicted in Fig. 6-22. The overshoot and peak time
of the system with zero-order hold are found to be 48 percent and
3.5 sec, respectively. (p. 0.8, a = 13°, ₁ = 51°, y = 0.244.) These
5
quantities check closely with those shown in Fig. 6-5.
=
·
―
6.9 ROOT LOCUS METHOD FOR SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
The root locus technique has been quite useful and popular in
the analysis and design of linear control systems with continuous-
data. The root locus diagram of a continuous-data system is essen-
tially a plot of the roots of the characteristic equation as a function
of the loop gain K (K varies from 0 to ∞). In the preceding sec-
tion, we have shown that the stability and transient behavior of
sampled-data systems depend entirely upon the poles (and zeros, for
transient response) of a closed-loop pulse-transfer function C*(s)/R*(s)
or the closed-loop z-transfer function C(z)/R(z). Therefore, if the
conventional root locus technique can be conveniently adapted to
sampled-data system, the transient behavior and other important
properties of these systems may conceivably be obtained with ease
from a plot of the poles of C*(s)/R*(s) or the poles of C(z)/R(z)
with the system loop gain K as a variable parameter.
Let us first consider the possibility of constructing the root locus
plot of a sampled-data system in the s-plane. For the simple closed-
loop system shown in Fig. 6-23, the closed-loop pulse-transfer func-
tion is given by
C*(s)
-
G*(s)
R* (s) 1+ HG*(s)
(6-77)
† W. R. Evans, "Graphical Analysis of Control Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E. 67,
1948, pp. 547-551.

Sec. 6.9
179
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
T
C(z)
C*(s)
R(s)
E(s)
X
E*(s)
G(s)
C(s)
H(s)
Fig. 6-23 Simple closed-loop system with sampled-data.
The characteristic equation of the system is
1+ HG*(s) = 0
(6-78)
Equation (6-78) is generally a transcendental function of s, and since.
the conventional root locus technique applies only to algebraic equa-
tions, the difficulty involved in this case is apparent. The main idea
Δίω
jw
s-plane
s-plane
j2ws
K=0X
K=0
όπως
∞4K
jws
K=0 X
*K=0
iz ws
∞48
K=0
K=0
-1
O
-1
- j = ws.
∞4K
K∞
-jws
K=0 X
K=0
∞4K
K∞
-j2ws
K=0 X
K=0
(0)
(b)
G(s) = K/s(s + 1), H(s) = 1
Fig. 6-24 Pole-zero configuration_of_HG*(s) and the root locus
diagram in the s-plane of the sampled-data system in Fig. 6-3.
(a) Poles of HG*(s). (b) Root loci.

180
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
of the root locus is that the roots of 1+ HG*(s) = 0 are plotted
from the knowledge of the poles and zeros of HG*(s). However, we
know that the poles and zeros of HG*(s) are infinite in number. As
an example, consider the system shown in Fig. 6-3. The pole-zero
configuration of HG*(s) is depicted in Fig. 6-24a. We can show that
the root loci of the characteristic equation take the form of Fig.
6-24b when the forward gain K is varied from 0 to ∞. Clearly, for
more complex pole-zero configurations for HG*(s), the construction
of the root loci in the s-plane will be more difficult because of the
periodic property of HG*(s). However, the closed-loop z-transfer
function C(z)/R(z) is a rational function of z, and the characteristic
equation of the system in Fig. 6-23 in the z-domain is an algebraic
equation in z,
1 + HG(z) = 0
(6-79)
Therefore, the construction of the z-plane root loci should be quite.
straightforward since rules of construction of the conventional root
locus diagrams are directly applicable to the z-plane loci. In essence,
the construction of the z-plane root loci is to find the points that
satisfy the following conditions:
(1)
(2)
|HG(x) = 1
| HG(z)
=
180° + k × 360°
TABLE 6-2
(6-80)
(6-81)
RULES OF CONSTRUCTION OF ROOT LOCUS DIAGRAMS
(1) Starting points
(K = 0)
(2) Ending points
(K → ∞)
(3) Number of separate
root loci
(4) Symmetry of root
loci
(5) Asymptotes of root
loci as s→ ∞
The root loci start at the poles of HG(z). (The poles
include both those in the finite z-plane and at infinity.)
The root loci end at the zeros of HG(z). (The zeros
include both in the finite z-plane and at infinity.)
where
Number of loci N = Z if Z> P
Number of loci N = P if Z < P
P = number of finite poles of HG(z)
Ꮓ number of finite zeros of HG(z).
=
The root loci of systems with rational transfer functions
are symmetrical with respect to the real axis of the z-
plane.
For large values of s, the root loci are asymptotic to
straight lines with angles determined by
(2k + 1)π
P-Z
where k = 0, 1, 2,
k PZ. =
up to (but does not include)

Sec. 6.9
181
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
(6) Intersection of the
asymptotes
(7) Root loci on the real
axis
(8) Angles of departure
and arrival
(9) Intersection of the
root loci with the
unit circle
(a) The intersection of the asymptotes lies only on the
real axis in the z-plane.
(b) The point of intersection of the asymptotes on the
real axis is given by
1 =
=
-
(b₁₁)
Σ Poles of HG(z) – Σ zeros of HG(2)
P-Z
On a given section of the real axis in the z-plane, root
loci may be found in the section only if the total number
of poles and zeros of HG(z) to the right of the section
is odd.
The angle of departure of the root locus from a pole (or
the angle of arrival at a zero) of HG(z), can be deter-
mined by assuming a point z₁ which is very close to the
pole (or zero) and is on the root locus associated with
the pole (or zero), and applying the following equation:
m
-
m+n
Σ/2+2 - Σ /z+ 1 =
| HG(≈1)
=
i=1
j=1
(2k + 1)π
The values of K at the crossing points on the unit circle
in the z-plane made by the root loci may be obtained
by use of the modified Routh-Hurwitz criterion.
(10) Breakaway points of If the characteristic equation of a sampled-data system
the root loci
is written as
K = f(x)
all breakaway points on the root loci are determined by
solving for the roots of
(11) Calculation of K on
the root loci
dK
dz
= 0
The value of K corresponding to any point on the root
loci in the z-plane may be determined graphically from
the following equation:
1
K =
| HG(≈1) |
2, . . . all integers.
where k = 0, 1,
If we write HG(z) in a standard form as
HG(z) =
22). (z
K(x + 21)(x + ≈2) . . . (≈ + 2m)
(z + p₁)(z + P2) . . . (≈ + Pm+n)
(6-82)
Then, the two conditions given in Eqs. (6-80) and (6-81) become
|HG(z)| =
=
m
KII│2 + 21│
i=1
m+n
II│z + pi│
=
1
(6-83)
j=1

182
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
and
m
m + n
|HG(x) =
Σ/2 + 21
2=1
-
Σ /z + P
= (2k + 1)π
(6-84)
j=1
Consequently, given the pole-zero configuration of HG(z), the con-
struction of the root locus diagram in the z-domain involves the
following two steps:
(1) A search for the points in the z-plane that satisfy the con-
dition given by Eq. (6-84).
(2) The value of K at a given point z, on the root loci is deter-
mined from Eq. (6-83).
As mentioned above, the rules of construction developed from the
properties of the root loci for continuous-data systems are still ap-
plicable in the z-plane; these rules are tabulated in Table 6-2. The
proofs of the rules are not included here; they may be found in most
standard textbooks on feedback control systems.†
Example 6-8
In this illustrative example, the root loci of the sampled-data system shown
in Fig. 6-3 will be constructed in the z-plane. The open-loop z-transfer func-
tion of the system is given by Eq. (6-5) and is now repeated as follows:
G(z):
=
K2(1 - e-T)
(z − 1)(z — e¯¹)
(6-85)
Since the system has unity-feedback, H(s) = 1, and the characteristic equation
is
1+G(z) = 0
(6-86)
The root loci of the system are the plots of the roots of Eq. (6-86) when K
is varied from 0 to oo. Let us consider that the sampling period T is one
second, then, Eq. (6-85) reads
0.632Kz
G(z)
=
(≈ − 1)(z − 0.368)
-
=
---
(6-87)
= 1, one of
- ∞. From
+ 1 and between
From rule (10),
Equation (6-87) has two poles at z = 1, z= 0.368, and a zero at z = 0. The
root loci in the z-plane can be constructed on the basis of the rules given in
Table 6-2. From rule (1), the loci start from z 0.368 and z =
the loci terminates at z = 0, and the other locus terminates at
rule (7), the parts of the real axis between + 0.368 and
minus infinity and the origin constitute sections of the loci.
the breakaway points (there are two) are located at z =
+ 0.62. However, we can show that for this two-pole and one zero configura-
tion, the complex conjugate section of the root loci is a circle. This is proved
as follows:
-
0.62 and z =
Let
z = x + jy
(6-88)
† B. C. Kuo, Automatic Control Systems, Chapter 8, (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.:
Prentice-Hall Inc., 1962).

Sec. 6.9
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 183
Then, Eq. (6-87) becomes
G(z)
0.632K(x + jy)
=
[(x − 1) + jy][(x − 0.368) + jy]
(6-89)
On the root loci, z must satisfy Eq. (6-84); therefore,
/G(z)
= tan-¹ (2)
-
tan-1
y(2x — 1.368)
=
(x − 1)(x − 0.368)
-
y2
(2k + 1)π
(6-90)
-
tan/G(z)
=
1+
Hence
x
-
Taking the tangent of both sides of the last equation yields
y
x
y(2x 1.368)
1)(x − 0.368) — y²
y(2x-1.368
= tan (2k + 1)π
= 0
y
(x − 1)(x − 0.368)
y(2x-1.368)
y²
(6-91)
0
x
-
-
(x − 1)(x − 0.368) - y²
(6-92)
Simplifying, we have
x² + y² = 0.368
(6-93)
which is an equation of a circle with the center at the origin of the z-plane,
and the radius is 0.62.
The complete root loci of the system for T = 1 sec are drawn in Fig.
6-25. The intersection of one of the loci with the unit circle is at z = - 1;
the corresponding value of K at the point is equal to 4.32.
Im
z-plane
K=2.18
K=0.244
∞ K K=4.32
K=4.1
K4∞
K=0
K=0
Re
-1
-0.62
0.368 0.62
1
K=2.18
Unit circle
K2(1 − e−T)
G(x)
=
T = 1 sec
(≈ − 1)(≈ − e−T)
Fig. 6-25 Root locus plot of sampled-data system in Fig. 6-3.

184
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Im
z-plane
Critical valu
∞ K K=2.63
K=1.35
-1
K=2.16
-0.368
K=0
K+∞ 0.135
K=0.463
0.368
K=0
Re
K=1.35
Unit circle
G(x)
=
K2(1 − e−T)
(x − 1)(z − e−T)
T = 2 sec
Fig. 6-26 Root locus plot of sampled-data system in Fig. 6-3.
In a similar manner, the root loci of the system for T
scribed by
x² + y²
= 0.135
=
2 sec are de-
(6-94)
and the loci are depicted in Fig. 6-26. The critical value of K for system
stability when T = 2 sec is found (from Fig. 6-14) to be 2.63 as compared
with 4.32 for T 1 sec. Notice that when the sampling period of the system
is increased from one to two seconds, the stability margin is decreased; how-
ever, the circular section of the loci has a smaller radius. This is usually a
misleading feature of the z-plane root loci, since one would think that normally
the stability of systems is measured by the closeness of the root loci with the
unit circle. The fact is that the loci in Fig. 6-25 and Fig. 6-26 seem to be
of the same form, but the values of K at various points on the two plots are
not in correspondence.
By the same analytical method used above, we can show that the complex
conjugate section of the root loci of this system is generally described by the
following equation:
x² + y² = e−T
(6-95)
Relating the z-plane loci to the s-plane loci shown in Fig. 6-24 can be
very interesting. Evidently, since the z-plane is the conformal mapping of the
s-plane through the z-transformation zest, the z-plane root loci of Fig. 6-25
are conformal to the s-plane loci in Fig. 6-24.

Sec. 6.9
185
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Example 6-9
Plot the root locus diagrams of the sampled-data system with zero-order
hold as shown in Fig. 6-4. The open-loop transfer function of the system is
given by Eq. (6-16) and is now simplified to
GhoG(2)=
K[(T1+e)≈ - Te-T + 1 - e-"]
·
-
(≈ − 1)(≈ — e¯T)
(6-96)
Equation (6-96) can also be written as
GhoG(z) = K(T − 1 + e¯T).
(z+a)
≈ − 1)(≈ − e−T)
(6-97)
where
1
a =
(6-98)
-T
e - Te-T
T-1+ e-T
The open-loop z-transfer function GhoG(z) has poles at z = 1, z=e" and a
zero at ≈== a. The root loci in the z-plane must start from z =
1 and z =
e-, and one of the loci terminates at z = - a, whereas the other locus termi-
Im
z-plane
K=15
K+∞
-0.717
O
Unit circle
Root locus
K=2.43
K=0.196
K=0
K=0
*
Re
0.368
0.65
1
K=2.43
GroG(z)
=
K[(T1+ e-T)z - Te-T + 1
-
(x − 1)(z - e-T)
e-T]
T = 1 sec
Fig. 6-27 Root locus plot of the sampled-data system with zero-
order hold in Fig. 6-4.

186
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Pole-zero configuration
of HG(z)
TABLE 6-3
ROOT LOCI OF SOME SIMPLE 2-TRANSFER FUNCTIONS
Characteristic of loci
One pole
Straight line from the pole to
minus infinity on the real axis of
the z-plane
∞4K
Root locus plot
K=0
One pole and one zero
Straight line from the pole to
the zero on the real axis in the
z-plane
K=∞
K=0
-1
K∞
Two real poles
Straight line between the poles
on the real axis and a vertical
line bisecting the real loci
K=0
K=0
K=0
Two complex conjugate Vertical straight lines from the
poles
two poles
*K=0
K∞

Sec. 6.9
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 187
le-zero configuration
of HG(z)
TABLE 6-3 (Continued)
Characteristic of loci
Root locus plot
Two poles and one
ero.
(real poles)
Straight line segments on the real
axis, and a circle described by
ero: 2 = = ;
pole: P₁ = μ1
r =
(x + a)² + y² = r²
a = {
[µ₁μ₂ — §(µ1 + µ₂) + §²]}
-
Ө
Two poles and one
zero.
(complex conjugate
Straight line segments on the real
axis, and circular segments de-
scribed by
poles)
zero: z= = $
pole: p₁ = μ₁ + jv
T=
P2 = μ₁ - jv
(x + a)² + y²
ξ
a =
-
r-2
(μ} + v² − 2µ15 + §²)}
Two poles and two
zeros.
(real poles and real
zeros)
zero: Z₁ = ઃ
Z2 = $2
pole: Pi
=
μ1
P₂ = μ2
Two poles and two
zeros.
(complex or real)
zero: z₁ = 1 + jn
pole: Pi
=
-
ກາ
M₁ + ju
P₂ = M₂- jv
Straight line segments on real
axis, and circular segments de-
scribed by
a=
r² = a²
(x + a)² + y² = r²
μιμη - ξιξη
(µ1 + µ2) − (§1 + §2)
(μ1 + μ₂)§152 − ($1 + §2) M1 M2
+ (µ1 + µ2) − (§1 + §2)
Straight line segments on real
axis, and circular segments de-
scribed by
(x + a)² + y² = r²
(P₁₂+ v²)
-
a =
(μ₁ + μ2) -
r² = a² +
-
(§1§2 + n²)
(1 + 2)
(µ1 + µg) (§152 + n²)
(µ1 + µ2) − (§1 + §2)
(§1 + §2) (M1 M₂ + v²)
(μ1 + μg) - (§1 + §2)
Χ
X
X

188
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
K=1.45
Im
z-plane
K=3.7
-1.5
K=00
-0.524
O
K=0
*
0.135
K=0.157
K=0
Re
0.48
Root locus
K=1.45
Unit circle
K[(T − 1 + e−T)z − Te-T + 1 − e−T]
GroG(z) =
-
T = 2 sec
(≈ − 1)(x − e−T)
-
Fig. 6-28 Root locus plot of the sampled-data system with zero-
order hold in Fig. 6-4.
--
nates at ∞. The real part of the root loci lies in the section between z =
e-T and z = +1 and between minus infinity and z = a on the real axis.
The complex conjugate section of the loci is obtained by substituting ≈ = X
+ jy and Eq. (6-97) into the phase angle requirement of root loci in Eq.
(6-84). After simplification, the result is
(x + a)² + y² = a² + a + (a + 1)e¯T
-
(6-99)
a, 0) on
= 1
This last equation represents a circle with the center located at (-
the real axis, and the radius of the circle is [a² + a + (a + 1)e¯T]².
The root loci of the sampled-data system with zero-order hold for T
sec and T = 2 sec are constructed in Fig. 6-27 and Fig. 6-28, respectively.
Notice that for the system with zero-order hold, the root loci may intersect
the unit circle at complex conjugate points rather than on the real axis as in
the case when the hold circuit is absent. The critical value of K for stability
is 2.43 for T = 1 sec, and it is 1.45 for T
2 sec.
―
From these two examples, we see that the construction of the
root locus diagram for a sampled-data system in the z-plane is similar
to that of the continuous case, except that the interpretation on
system stability is different since the stable region is now inside the
unit circle.

Sec. 6.10
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 189
When investigating the transient behavior from the z-plane root
loci, the constant damping, the constant damping ratio, and the con-
stant frequency loci in the z-plane must be referred to. The mapping
of these loci from the s-plane to the z-plane has been given in Sec.
4.3; the application of these loci with the root locus plots will be
discussed in the next section.
By use of the method illustrated in Examples 6-8 and 6-9, the
root loci of any sampled-data system with rational HG(z) may be
constructed. Just as in continuous-data systems, the Spirulet can also
be used as an aid in the cut-and-try method of plotting the root
loci in the z-plane. The root loci of some simple z-transfer functions.
are given in Table 6-34.
6.10 TRANSIENT RESPONSE AND RELATIVE STABILITY
FROM ROOT LOCUS PLOTS
Once the root locus diagram of a given sampled-data system is
constructed in the z-plane, the absolute stability as well as the rela-
tive stability of the system can be observed from the root loci. Ab-
solute stability requires that all roots of the characteristic equation
lie inside the unit circle in the z-plane. Relative stability, on the
other hand, is also studied in terms of the locations of the roots of
the characteristic equation. The questions that concern us are: If the
system is stable, how stable and how good is it? Does its transient
behavior satisfy the designer's specifications? Specifically, we want
to obtain information of some performance criteria such as the set-
tling time, maximum overshoot, and damping ratio of the system.
In general, if the realization of certain minimum settling time and
specific damping ratio is of interest, the behavior of the root loci
with respect to the constant damping factor and the constant damp-
ing ratio loci in the z-plane should be investigated. These loci and
the constant frequency loci were given in Sec. 4-3. The constant
damping loci are a family of concentric circles centered at the origin
of the z-plane; the radius of the circle corresponding to a given
damping factor σ ise, where T is the sampling period in seconds.
The constant frequency Toci are straight lines emanating from the
origin of the z-plane at angles of = T radians measured from the
positive real axis. These loci and their s-plane counterparts are shown.
† Available from the Spirule Company, 9728 El Venado, Whittier, Calif.
M. Mori, "Root-Locus Method of Pulse Transfer Function for Sampled-Data
Control Systems," I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, PGAC-3, November 1957, pp.
13-20.

190 TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 6
in Fig. 4-4 and 4-5. If the design of a certain sampled-data system
requires a certain minimum settling time, then all the characteristic
equation roots of the system must lie to the left of the constant
damping locus s = σ in the \s-plane, and correspondingly in the z-
plane all roots must lie inside the circle with radius (Fig. 6-
29). For a constant damping ratio, the constant loci in the z-
plane are shown to be a family of logarithmic spirals, except for
Š = 0 and = 1. Typical constant loci for = 0.5 are shown in
Fig. 6-30 for the s-plane and the z-plane. However, if a certain damp-
ing ratio is specified, all the characteristic equation roots must lie
to the left of the constant damping ratio line in the s-plane (if this
damping ratio is 50 percent, the roots must not be found in the
jw
s-plane
s-plane
Im
z-plane
Unit circle
Fig. 6-29 Constant damping loci in the s-plane and the z-plane.
jw
1232 jus
30°
jws
30°
Zjws
- ξίως
-jws
Im
ως
z-plane
Re
@=0
1
Re
Unit circle
-3/jws
Fig. 6-30 Constant damping ratio in the s-plane and the z-plane
for (= 0.5.
-

Sec. 6.10
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 191
shaded region in Fig. 6-30). Correspondingly, no characteristic equa-
tion roots must be found to the right of the logarithmic spiral of
the given in the z-plane. As is shown in Fig. 6-30, since as the
frequency is increased, the magnitude of the spiral decreases
logarithmically and its phase angle increases linearly, and eventually
the shaded region in the z-plane is to cover the entire interior of
the unit circle. At this point, it would seem that the damping ratio
requirement for sampled-data systems could never be realized. For-
jw s-plane
--
클​jus
jws
Im
z-plane
Insignificant
poles
30°
ως
½ jws
X
w=0
Re
Primary
strip
Insignificant
poles
- ½ jws
-1 ws
Unit circle
30°
--jws
- 23/jws
(a)
Insignificant
흘 ​jws
|Im
poles
30°
s-plane
z-plane
X
X
Primary
strip
X
X
-
- jws
---jws
30°
ως
Re
MIT.
1
ως
-ws
- 3 jws
(b)
Fig. 6-31 (a) Constant damping ratio loci in the s-plane and the
z-plane for = 0.5 when only the primary strip in the s-plane
is significant. (b) Constant damping ratio loci in the s-plane and
the z-plane for = 0.5 when only the primary strip and the two
strips between jw, are significant.

192
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
3=60°
s = plane
45°
20° 10° 3°
30° 15° 5°
90°-ß
(0)
3= Ꭴ ( = 0
B=3° = 0.052-
Im
ws/4
B=5° = 0.087-
B=10° = 0.174
B=15° 0.2597
-8 = 20° = 0.342
-B = 30° = 0.5
-8 = 45° = 0.707
-3 = 60° C = 0.866
ws/2
w=0
8 = 90% = 1.0
Fig. 6-32 (a) The constant
(b)
loci in the s-plane for the periodic
strip of 0 to jws/2. (b) The constant loci in the z-plane corre-
sponding to the loci in the s-plane in (a).

Sec. 6.10
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 193
tunately, most servo systems have components that act as low-pass
filter. Therefore, if the forward path transfer function of a sampled-
data system introduces attenuation at high frequencies so that the
high-frequency poles in the complementary strips become insignificant,
only a portion of the logarithmic spiral need be considered. For
instance, if the forward path transfer function introduces rapid atten-
uation at frequencies higher than w/2 so that only poles in the
primary strip of the s-plane are significant, to realize a damping ratio
of y = 0.5, the characteristic equation roots must be found inside the
unshaded region of Fig. 6-31a. If rapid attenuation is introduced by
the forward path elements at frequencies higher than w., then only
the poles in the strips between + jws and jw, in the s-plane need
be considered; the corresponding region in the z-plane is the un-
shaded area inside the unit circle as shown in Fig. 6-31b. In Fig.
6-32 the constant loci for various values of
-
are plotted in the
∞ KK=15
Im
z-plane
Root locus
K = 2.43
Constant
damping factor
locus
σ = 0.332
Constant
damping ratio
= 0.5
K = ∞0
+0.717
K = 0.49
Constant frequency
w=0.558
rad/sec
32°
K=0
| x=0
K=
1.0
0.368
0.65
K = 0.196
Unit circle
T = 1 sec
Fig. 6-33 Root locus plot of the sampled-data system with zero-
order hold shown in Fig. 6-4.

194 TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 6
s-plane and the z-plane for the positive half of the primary strip.
The loci for frequency range of 0 to - jws/2 are just the mirror
image of the curves shown with the mirror placed on the real z-axis.
The relative stability of a sampled-data system can now be in-
vestigated by superimposing the constant, σ, and a loci on the
system root loci plot. Let us consider the system shown in Fig. 6-4.
The root locus plot of the system is again constructed in Fig. 6-33
for T = 1 sec. Inspection of the root locus plot shows that the root
locus intersects the = 0.5 locus at the point that corresponds to
K = 0.49. Therefore, if the forward gain of the system is 0.49, the
damping ratio of the second-order system is equal to 50 percent.
This answer is significant, since in this particular system the forward
transfer function between the sampler and the output provides suffi-
cient attenuation at frequencies higher than w/2 = π, so that only
the constant locus in the primary strip is necessary. By use of the
constant damping and the constant frequency loci, the damping factor
and of the system when K = 0.49 are found to be 0.332 sec¹ and
0.558 rad/sec, respectively.
6.11 SYSTEM RESPONSE BETWEEN SAMPLING INSTANTS
Thus far, the z-transform method has been used to evaluate the
output responses of sampled-data systems at sampling instants only.
In Sec. 6.2, the output sequence of a simple second-order system with
sampled-data is obtained by the z-transform method, and the output
responses are sketched in Fig. 6-5 for the system operating with and
without a zero-order hold. However, the z-transform analysis does
not yield any information on the response between sampling instants.
Therefore, in this particular system the continuous output response
is estimated by connecting the output samples by a smooth curve.
In general, in a well-behaved system if the sampling frequency is
high as compared with the natural frequency of the system, this
estimation of the continuous response from the sampled data is rea-
sonably accurate. But for a certain class of systems, oscillation may
exist in the response between sampling instants; then a complete
description of the actual system response would certainly require the
knowledge of the response waveform between sampling instants as
well. Also, in evaluating the maximum overshoot of a time response,
the maximum value given by the sampled sequence is usually less
than the actual value, unless the maximum overshoot happens to fall
right on a sampling instant. In order to calculate the maximum

Sec. 6.11
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 195
overshoot more accurately, we again have to recover the signal be-
tween sampling instants.
In Chapter 4 the submultiple sampling method and the modified
z-transform method are used to evaluate the response between samp-
ling instants for open-loop sampled-data systems. These methods will
now be extended to the studies of closed-loop systems with sampled-
data.
1. The Submultiple Sampling Method
The application of the submultiple sampling method to the eval-
uation of response between sampling instants of a closed-loop system
with sampled-data is illustrated in Fig. 6-34. In this single-loop system
fictitious samplers Sno and Sn with sampling period T/n where n =
1, 2, 3, are inserted between S. (the regular sampler with
sampling period T) and G(s) and at the output terminal, respec-
tively. The fictitious samplers are not physical components; they are
used simply to facilitate the calculation of system response during
the sampling periods. Since the input to the fictitious sampler Sno is
a train of impulses of period T, and Sno is sampling at a rate n
times as fast as So, the insertion of the switch Sno does not in any.
way affect the original system behavior. Therefore, the system shown
in Fig. 6-34 behaves exactly as if the two fictitious samplers were
absent.
r(t)
e(t) X
X _e"(1) X e*(1),
E(s) So E(z) Sno E (z)
B(s)
T c(1)
Tin c*(1)
G(s)
c(1)
H(s)
Fig. 6-34 Closed-loop sampled-data system with fictitious samplers
for the evaluation of response between sampling instants.
At the output terminal of the system shown in Fig. 6-34, the
actual continuous output is denoted by c(t); the ordinary z-transform
of the output C(z) is obtained from the output of the sampler S₁.
But if additional information on c(t) in between the ordinary samp-

196
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
ling instants is desired, the output of Sn is used. It follows from
Eq. (4-148) that the output of S may be written as
C(2)n = G(z)nE(z)
(6-100)
where E(z) is the ordinary z-transform of e(t), and G(z), is defined
in Eq. (4-149) as
G(z)n = [G(2)] 2=21″
T=T/n
The output transform of the sampler Sno is
(6-101)
E(x) = R(x) − B(x) = R(z) – HG(z) E(z)
(6-102)
Solving for E(z) in the last equation yields
E(z)
=
R(z)
1+ HG(z)
(6-103)
Substitution of Eq. (6-103) into Eq. (6-100) yields
C(≈)n = G(≈)n1 + HG(2)
R(z)
(6-104)
Therefore, the transform of the response at discrete instants between
sampling instants can be evaluated from the ordinary z-transforms.
The inverse z-transform of C(z)n gives the output sequence c(kT/n)
for k = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . ., and nq+1 where q is the number of
additional sampled values desired between any two consecutive
sampling instants.
Example 6-10
Evaluate the output response at two additional instants (uniform) during
each sampling period for the sampled-data system shown in Fig. 6-3. The
sampling period is one sec, K = 1, and the input signal is a unit step function.
The open-loop transfer function of the system is given by Eq. (6-5).
G(z)
=
(1 e-T)
(≈ − 1)(≈ − e−¹)
(6-105)
Using Eq. (6-101), we have from the last equation
G(z)n =
21/(1 - e-T/n)
(~1/" — 1)(~1/n — e-T/n)
-
- -
(6-106)
Since T is one sec and since, for two additional samples between sampling
instants, n = 2 + 1,
n = 2+1
=
3
Substituting the value of n into Eq. (6-106), we have
or
z¹/³(1 − e−1/3)
-
(≈¹/³ — 1)(z¹³ − e−1/3)
(6-107)
G(z)3
=
(6-108)
0.29321/3
G(2)3
=
(6-109)
(~1/3 — 1)(≈1/3 — 0.717)

Sec. 6.11
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 197
Now substitution of Eq. (6-109) into Eq. (6-104) yields
C(z)3 =
0.29321/3
z(z -0.368)
(≈1/3 — 1)(≈¹/3 — 0.717) (≈ − 1)(≈ − 0.368) + 0.632≈
(6-110)
Letting
we have
23 = 21/3
233 =2
(6-111)
(6-112)
Substituting Eq. (6-111) and (6-112) into Eq. (6-110), we have
C(z)3
=
ог
C(z) =
0.293(0.368)
(≈3 − 1)(≈3 — 0.717)(≈3 − 1)(≈3 − 0.368) + 0.632z3
0.2932 0.1082
-
(6-113)
-
23 − 1.717z3 + 0.717z§ − 0.73623 + 1.26≈3 − 0.527≈3 + 0.368≈3 − 0.632≈3 + 0.264
By means of long division Eq. (6-114) is written
(6-114)
1.6
c(t)
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
•
O
O
1
2
3
4 5 6
Time (sec)
7 8
9
10
Fig. 6-35 System output between sampling instants of the system
in Example 6-8.

198
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
2
C(z)3 = 0.293zz¹ + 0.503zz² + 0.648z5³ + 0.86z3' + 1.01zz³ + 1.10zz6
+1.1427 +1.16258 +1.20≈5° + 1.132510+ 1.125" + . . .
(6-115)
In the last equation the coefficient of corresponds to the value of c(t) at
t = kT/3 for k = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .. Notice that the coefficients of z9, 23³, 230, 23',
. . . agree with the output sequence given by Eq. (6-9) (slight discrepancies
are due to slide rule inaccuracy); the other samples of Eq. (6-115) give the
value of c(t) between sampling instants. The output response of the system,
based on the information contained in C(z),, is depicted in Fig. 6-35.
2. The Modified z-Transform Method
The complete time response of a closed-loop sampled-data system
can also be obtained by use of the modified z-transform technique
discussed in Sec. 4.8. The technique of determining the output trans-
form of a closed-loop system with sampled-data in terms of the mod-
ified z-transform has been discussed in Sec. 5.3. For the single-loop
system shown in Fig. 6-36, the modified z-transform of the system
output is given by Eq. (5-85) as
Fictitious
sampler
T C(z,m)
C(s)
R(s)
E (s)
E*(s)
G(s)
e-(1-m)T
Fictitious
time delay
H(s)
e(1-m)T
Fictitious
time advance
Fig. 6-36 Fictitious delay and advance in closed-loop sampled-
data system for the evaluation of the modified z-transform of
output response.
C(z, m) =
G(z, m)
1 + HG(z)
R(2)
(6-116)
where G(z, m) is defined as the modified z-transfer function of the
forward path elements. The output modified z-transform for more
complex system configurations may be derived by use of the signal
flow graph technique described in Sec. 5.3.
As illustrated in Sec. 4.8, the inverse modified z-transform may
be performed either by the power series expansion method (Eq. 4-
208 and Eq. 4-209) or the inversion formula method (Eq. 4-216).
To illustrate the determination of the complete system response

Sec. 6.11
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 199
by the modified z-transform method, the following illustrative example
is given.
Example 6-11
Compute the complete output response of the closed-loop system of Fig.
6-3 when the system is subjected to a unit step function input. The gain
constant K is unity, and the sampling period is one sec.
The forward path transfer function of the system is
-
1
G(s) = 5(8 + 1)
s(s
(6-117)
From the table of modified z-transforms, the modified z-transform of G(s) is
obtained as
G(z, m)
z(1 − e−mr) + (e¯mº − e−¹)
=
(≈ − 1)(z — e¯T)
For T 1 sec, Eq. (6-118) becomes.
=
(6-118)
G(z, m)
=
z(1 − e−m) + (e
-m
-
0.368)
(≈ − 1)(≈ — 0.368)
-
(6-119)
The z-transform of G(s), G(z), is ordinarily found from the z-transform table,
but it is interesting to note that G(z) is also obtainable from the modified z-
transform G(z, m) by setting m equal to unity (see Eq. 4-179).
Therefore,
0.632z
G(z) = G(z, 1)
=
(z
(≈ 1)(≈ 0.368)
(6-120)
which checks with the result from Eq. (6-105).
From Eq. (6-116) the output modified z-transform is
z(1 − e−m) + (e-m
(≈ − 1)(≈ − 0.368)
0.632z
C(z, m)
-
1 +
(≈ − 1)(≈
-
0.368)
R(z)
0.368)
For a unit step input and after simplification, Eq. (6-121) becomes
C(z, m) =
2(1-e-m) + (em - 0.368)
-
− 1)(≈² − 0.736≈ + 0.368) *
-
(6-121)
(6-122)
The complete output response of the system is obtained by first taking the
inverse modified z-transform of Eq. (6-122) and then letting m take on various
values between 0 and 1. First, let us use the power series expansion method.
Expanding C(z, m) of Eq. (6-122) into a power series in 2-1 by dividing the
denominator into the numerator using long division, we have
C(z, m)
When m =
=
-
(1 − e¯m)z¯¹ + (1.368 — 0.736e¯m)z¯² + (1.266 0.174e¯)2−3
+ (1.058 +0.143e¯m)≈¯ + (0.935 + 0.25e¯™)z¯5
+ (0.92 0.16e-m)≈¯ + ...
-3
(6-123)
1, C(z, m) is reverted to C(z); therefore,
C(z) = C(≈, 1) = 0.632z‍¹ + 1.0972-² + 1.2022-³ + 1.11≈¯*
+1.022-5 + 0.98z-6 + ... (6-124)
which checks closely with Eq. (6-10).

200
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
The output response c(t) at all times is given by the coefficients of Eq.
(6-123) when m is varied between zero and unity continuously. The corres-
pondence of the coefficients and output response is tabulated in the following:
Coefficient of 2-¹ (1 − e¯m) = c(1 + m − 1)T
Coefficient of 2-2
-
(1.368 0.736e¯m) = c(2 + m − 1)T
-
(1.266 0.174e¯m) = c(3 + m
-
1)T
(1.058+0.143e¯m) = c(4 + m − 1)T
Coefficient of 2-3
Coefficient of 2-4
Coefficient of 2-5
Coefficient of z -6
(0.935+0.25e-m) = c(5 + m − 1)T
(0.92 +0.16e¯m) = c(6 + m − 1)T
If we arbitrarily set m = 1/3 and m = 2/3, the output response at two
points between sampling instants may be obtained. The results are tabulated
as follows:
c(0.333)
c(1.333)
c(2.333)
0.283
0.84
1.10
c(3.333)
0.956
c(4.333)
c(5.333)
1.11
1.03
c(0.667)
0.487
c(1.667)
1.00
c(2.667)
1.17
c(3.667)
1.12
c (4.667)
c(5.667)
1.06
1.00
These sampled values together with the response at the actual sampling
instants are sketched in Fig. 6-37.
Let us now perform the inverse modified z-transform of Eq. (6-122) by
means of the inversion formula. Substituting Eq. (6-122) into the inversion
formula of Eq. (4-216), we have
1
−
-
c(nT, m) = 27; § = [(1 − e−m)≈ + (e−m — 0.368)],
(x-1)(x² = 0.7362 +0.368)
-
n-1 dz
(6-125)
where I is a closed path in the z-plane which encloses all the singularities
of C(z, m)-1¸
Factoring the denominator of the integrand of Eq. (6-125) yields
[(1 e-m) + (e-m-0.368)]="
− e−m)z
-
c(nT, m) = 27; $ (z − 1)(x — 0.368 0.482) (≈ 0.368 + j0.482)
−
From the residues theorem,
−
dz
(6-126)
c(nT, m) Residues of C(z, m)"-1 at the poles of C(z, m)". (6-127)
The residue of C(z, m)-1 at z = 1 is computed as
-
(1 − e¯m) + (e¯m — 0.368)
(0.632 — j0.482)(0.632 + j0.482)
-
The residue of C(z, m)z"-1 at z = 0.358+j0.482 is
-
1
(6-128)
[(1 − e¯m)(0.368 + j0.482) + (e-m 0.368)] (0.368 + j0.482)"
(-0.632j0.482) (j0.964)
(6-129)
which is simplified to

Sec. 6.11
201
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
1.6
c(t)
c(t)
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
DO
m
0-m=1
3 3
113213
1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Time (sec)
Fig. 6-37 System output response between sampling instants of
system in Example 6-11.
- 1.31(0.606)" [0.632e-m+j0.482(1-e-men-1)52.6°
-
(6-130)
In the same manner the residue of C(z, m)z"-1 at z = 0.368 j0.482 is
- 1.31(0.606)" [0.632e¯m — j0.482(1 − e¯m)]e¯¿(n − 1)52.6°
-
-
Therefore, the inverse modified z-transform of C(z, m) is
-
-1)52.6°
c(nT, m) = 1 − 1.31(0.606)" {[0.632e¯m + j0.482(1 − e¯m)]e³(n−1
+ [0.632e¯m — j0.482(1 − e¯m)]e−j(n−1)52.6°}
-
-
Equation (6-132) can be reduced to the following form:
-
c(nT, m) = 1 − 1.31(0.606)" [1.264e¯m cos (n − 1)52.6°
— 0.964(1 − e¯m) sin (n − 1)52.6°]
-
-
(6-131)
(6-132)
(6-133)
When the value of m is varied between zero and unity, the last equation
describes the complete output response of the system when the input is a unit
step function. For m 1, this equation describes the response at the sampling
instants only. Thus,
-
-
c(nT,1) = c(nT) = 1 − 1.31(0.606)" [0.465 cos (n − 1)52.6°
− 0.6091 sin (n − 1)52.6°]
(6-134)

202
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
When proper values for n and m are substituted into Eq. (6-133), the complete
output response of the system can be shown to be identical to the response
shown in Fig. 6-37.
Thus far in this section we have demonstrated how the response
between sampling instants of a closed-loop sampled-data system can
be evaluated by means of the submultiple sampling and the modified
z-transform methods. The particular system chosen in the illustrative
examples, however, is of such a nature that the z-transform method
is quite valid in the calculation of the system response. But in general
if the system response between sampling instants is not well behaved,
it may be necessary to apply the two methods discussed above so
that the behavior of the system response between sampling instants
may be computed. In order to demonstrate the real usefulness of the
modified z-transform and some oscillatory properties of system re-
sponse between sampling instants, the following example is given.
Example 6-12
The open-loop transfer function of the unity-feedback system with sampled-
data shown in Fig. 6-38 is given by
G(s) =
27.8(s + 1)
s(s² + 6s+ 48.6)
(6-135)†
The sampling period is one second. Since the natural frequency of the system
is equal to 6.96 rad/sec (48.6) and the sampling frequency is 6.28 rad/sec,
the z-transform method should not be used in this problem. The modified z-
transform will be used here to compute the complete unit-step response of the
system.
R(s)
E (s) X E*(s),
G(s)
C(s)
H(s)=1
Fig. 6-38 Sampled-data system in Example 6-12.
The modified z-transform of G(s) is obtained by use of the expression
given in Eq. (4-196) or directly from the modified z-transform table. From
Eq. (4-196), we have
emvi
G(z, m) = z¹ Residues of G(§)
1
e at the poles of G() (6-136)
3
Or
G(z, m) = ¢-l
N(S) ems.T
n=1
D' (Sn) 1
(6-137)
+ E. I. Jury, "Synthesis and Critical Study of Sampled-Data Control Systems," Trans.
A. I. E. E., 75, Part 2, 1956, pp. 141-151.

Sec. 6.11
203
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
where
N(s)/D(s)G(s)
and s, denotes the poles of G(s).
(6-138)
The poles of G(s) are at s = 0, s =
3+j6.28, and s =
- 3 - j6.28;
therefore, Eq. (6-137) gives
G(z, m) = 2¯'[9
27.8
9+ (6.28) 1
+
-
z
+
27.8(2+ j2π)
-2(6.28)2πj12 1
27.8(-2j2π) emт(-3-j2x)
− 2(6.28)² + j12π 1
For T = 1 second, Eq. (6-139) is simplified to
1
G(z, m) = 0.573
[
2
-
Z
-
e-3m
0.05
(cos 2πm
-
- 7.27 sin 2лm)
1
emT(-3+j2x)
- (3 + j2x) T
--
2-1e-3-
—3—j2x) T
(6-139)
(6-140)
The z-transform of G(s) is readily obtained from Eq. (6-140) by letting
m = 1. Therefore,
0.573
G(z) = G(z, 1)
=
Z
-
0.0284
1 2- 0.05
(6-141)
Substituting Eq. (6-140) and Eq. (6-141) into Eq. (6-116) yields the modified
z-transform of the output of the system as
C(z, m) 0.573-
=
2
-
Z
1
z- 0.05) - (≈
1)e
z2
-зm (cos 2πm — 7.27 sin 2πm)
0.505z + 0.05
(6-142)
The output response at the sampling instants is obtained from
0.54522
C(z) = C(z, 1) =
=
(≈ − 1)(≈² – 0.505z + 0.05)
(6-143)
By long division, Eq. (6-143) is expanded into a power series in 2-¹.
(6-144)
C(z) = 0.545x¯¹ + 0.821z¯² + 0.9332-³ + 0.976z¯ + 0.994≈-5+..
The output samples at the sampling instants of c(nT) are now plotted in
Fig. 6-39.
2
c(1)
1
1
2
3
Time (sec)
4
5
Fig. 6-39 Response at sampling instants of the system in Example
6-12.

204
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
However, in this particular system, the exact output response cannot be
approximated by connecting the output sequence c(nT) with a smooth curve.
Because of the low sampling frequency chosen as compared with the natural
frequency of the system and because of the oscillatory nature of the system,
we do not expect that the response between sampling instants will be well-
behaved. To evaluate the intersampling response, we shall take the inverse
transform of C(z, m). Substituting Eq. (6–142) into the inversion formula of
Eq. (4-216) yields
c(nT, m)
=
1
2nj
-
----
-
(0.573≈ [(≈ — 0.05) — (≈ - 1)e-3m (cos 27m - 7.27 sin 27m)]
(≈ − 1)(≈² — 0.505≈ + 0.05)
༤
n-¹ dz
(6-145)
Factoring the denominator of the integrand of Eq. (6-145) and applying the
residues theorem, we have
c(nT, m)
=
Σ Residues of
-
0.573 [(z - 0.05) — (≈ 1)e-зm(cos 2πm
-
7.27 sin 2лm)],
(z
-
-
· 1)(z − 0.37)(≈ — 0.135)
-
(6-146)
at the poles z = 1, z= 0.37, and z = 0.135.
Computing the residues at the three poles of C(z, m), the inverse z-transform
of C(z, m) is finally reduced to the following expression:
-
c(nT, m) = 1 + 2.44[(0.135)" — (0.37)"] (cos 2πм - 7.27 sin 2лm)e-зm
+ (0.24)(0.135)" — (1.24)(0.37)”
(6-147)
Determining the maximum and the minimum of the response described by
Eq. (6-147) is of interest. This determination is made by differentiating
c(nT, m) with respect to m and setting the result equal to zero; that is,
Əc(nT, m)
= 0
Эт
(6-148)
From the last equation, the following relation is obtained:
m
max
= function of n
(6-149)
and since n is always an integer and the value of m should lie between zero
and unity, the maximum point can be located by a few cut-and-try steps.
Substituting Eq. (6-147) into Eq. (6-148) yields
Əc(nT, m)
Эт
=
2nе-3m(sin 2πm 7.27 cos 2πm)
3e-3m(cos 2m - 7.27 sin 2πм) = 0
(6-150)
Eq. (6-150) is reduced to
15.3 sin 2πm
--
48.6 cos 2πm
=
= 0
(6-151)
from which we have
tan 2πm
€3.18
(6-152)
Equation (6-152) is satisfied when
2πη =
1.26, 1.26 +π, 1.26 + 2π,
(6-153)

Sec. 6.11
205
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
However, since m is between 0 and 1, only the first two values given in the
last equation are significant. Therefore
and
2πm = 1.26 or 4.4
m = 0.2 or 0.7
(6-154)
(6-155)
We can actually show that when m = 0.2, the response is at a maximum and
that when m = 0.7, the response is at its minimum. Furthermore, since m max
and m min, as determined above, are not functions of n, a maximum point and
a minimum point will occur in each sampling period. Therefore, we can con-
clude that
Occurs at m = 0.2 + n for n = 1, 2, 3,
...
c(nT, m) max
(6-156)
However, the maxima in all sampling periods are not all of the same value,
unless the response is of the form of a sustained oscillation with constant
amplitude. Also,
c(nT, m) min Occurs at m = 0.7n for n = 1, 2, 3, . . . (6-157)
Similarly, the minima in all the sampling periods are not of the same value.
The values of c(nT, m) are calculated and tabulated in Table 6-4 for n =
1, 2, 3, 4; and various values of m. The complete output response of the
system is depicted in Fig. 6-40. Clearly the actual response between sampling
instants is altogether different from the smooth curve predicted from the z-
transform approximation. This difference verifies our original prediction that
the z-transform method will give misleading results in this particular system.
The oscillation between sampling instants, as observed in this system, not
indicated by the z-transform solution is often referred to as the "hidden
oscillation." In practice, the hidden oscillation between sampling instants may
be positively damped (as in the example just given), undamped, or negatively
damped (unstable, or hidden instability). A significant point in the system of
this example is that the poles of C(z) and the poles of C(z, m) are identical.
This indicates that the stability of the system response at the sampling instants
and in between the sampling instants is the same. However, in one rare
class of systems the modified z-transform of the system output may have more
poles than C(z). In this case, if all the poles of C(z) be located inside the
unit circle of the z-plane (indicating that the response at the sampling instants
is a stable one) but one or more poles of C(z, m) be located outside the unit
circle, the response between the sampling instants would actually be unstable.
This type of instability is sometimes referred to as the "hidden instability,"
since, like the hidden oscillation phenomenon, it is not indicated by the or-
dinary z-transform method.
+ R. H. Barker, "The Pulse Transfer Function and its Application to Sampling
Servo Systems," Proc. I. E. E., 99, Part 4, December 1952, pp. 302-317. E. I. Jury,
“Hidden Oscillations in Sampled-Data Control Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 76, Part 2,
January 1957, pp. 391-394.

206
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
3
c*(t)
c(t)
-c(t)
2
1
c(1)
1
2
3
4
5
Time (sec)
Fig. 6-40 Complete step response of the system in Example 6-12.
TABLE 6-4
SYSTEM RESPONSE OF THE SYSTEM IN EX. 6-12
m
0.2
0.216
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.716
0.85
1.0
c(1, m)
2.72
2.63
2.24
0.7
0.094
0.116
0.287
0.545
c(2, m)
1.92
1.87
1.67
0.9
0.592
0.603
0.69
0.821
c(3, m) 1.38
1.36
1.28
0.96
0.84
0.844 0.88
0.93
c(4, m)
1.14
1.14
1.11
0.98
0.94
0.94
0.95
0.97
6.12 STEADY-STATE RESPONSE STEADY-STATE ERROR
ANALYSIS
In the preceding sections, only the transient response of sampled-
data systems is discussed. However, just as in systems with contin-
uous signals, the steady-state response is also of great importance
in the analysis and design of sampled-data systems.
The steady-state error of a linear feedback control system with
unity-feedback (with or without sampled-data) is defined as the dif-
ference between the reference input r(t) and the actual output c(t)
when steady state is reached; that is
Steady-state error = ess lim e(t)
00+-7
=
lim [r(t) - c(t)] (6-158)
l→00

Sec. 6.12
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 207
The entire study of the steady-state error of sampled-data system is
based on the final-value theorem for z-transforms. If the system is
of such a nature that the z-transform method is valid so that e(t)
can be characterized by its values at the sampling instants, the
steady-state error at the sampling instants is described by
lim e*(t) = lim e(nT)
1→00
72000
(6-159)
From the final-value theorem of the z-transformation, we have
lim e* (t)
=
00+1
lim (12-¹)E(z)
2-1
where E(z) is the z-transform of e(t).
(6-160)
In cases where the system response cannot be adequately described
by the samples at the sampling instants (such as if hidden oscilla-
tion exists), the steady-state error between sampling instants can be
described by use of the final-value theorem for modified z-transforms.
Therefore, the actual steady-state error is
lim e(t)
=
lim e(nT, m)
L→00
N→00
=
lim (12)E(x, m) (6-161)
2-1
where E(z, m) is the modified z-transform of e(t).
In the studies of linear feedback control systems with continuous-
data, it is known that the steady-state error of a given system
depends on the type of reference input applied to the system and
also, to a great extent, on the nature and characteristics of the system
itself. We shall show that these properties are carried over to feed-
back control systems with sampled-data. Therefore, the concept of
the error constants and the error coefficients can be conveniently
extended from the continuous-data systems to the sampled-data systems.
The error constants are a direct measure of the steady-state error
of a system when typical test signals such as a step, ramp, or acceler-
ation function is applied. The definitions and the derivations of the
error constants are given as follows:
Referring to the unity-feedback system shown in Fig. 6-41, the
z-transform of the error signal is written
E(z) = R(z) - C(z)
=
R(z)
1 + G(z)
(6-162)+
For a sampled-data system (error-sampled) with non-unity feedback, the error
signal is defined as the difference between the reference input and the feedback signal.
Thus, the error transform is given by
E(z)
R(z)
1 + G(z)H(z)
ΟΙ E(z)
=
R(z)
1 + HG(z)
The discussion given in this section on steady-state errors can be applied to nonunity
feedback systems if G(z) is replaced by G(z) H(z) or HG(z).

208
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Substituting Eq. (6-162) into Eq. (6-160), the steady-state error at
the sampling instants is described by
e =
lim e* (t)
=
l→00
lim 2-1
2-1 Z 1 + G(x)
R(2)
(6-163)
This last equation is valid only if 1 + G(z) does not have any zeros
located on or outside the unit circle in the z-plane. Equation (6-163)
indicates that the steady-state error of a sampled-data system with
unity-feedback depends on the reference input signal R(z), and the
open-loop transfer function G(z). The computation of the steady-
state error is simplified if some basic facts and relations concerning
the type of reference input, the system type, and the error are estab-
lished. We shall consider only three basic types of test signals: step
displacement, ramp, and acceleration.
R(s)
E(s) E*(s)
G(s)
- C(s)
Fig. 6-41 Sampled-data control system with unity-feedback.
1. Steady-State Error of Sampled-Data Systems with Step
Displacement Input
If the reference input of the system of Fig. 6-41 is a step dis-
placement of magnitude R, the z-transform of r(t) is given by
R(z)
=
Z
Rz
1
-
Substituting Eq. (6-164) into Eq. (6-163) yields
-
R
2-11+ G(z) 1 + lim G(z)
R
ess = lim
If we let
K, = lim G(z)
2-1
2-1
(6-164)
(6-165)
(6-166)
and define K, as the "positional error constant," Eq. (6-165) becomes
ess
-
R
1 + KD
Solving for K, in the last equation, we have
Kp
Re
-
*
ess
(6-167)
(6-168)
Since R is the amplitude of the step displacement input, which is
also the desired amplitude of the steady-state output response, Eq.
(6-168) may be written as

Sec. 6.12
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 209
Positional error constant K,
=
Desired output - Allowable e
Allowable e
(6-169)
Equation (6-169) is quite useful in the design of feedback control
systems with sampled-data when the reference input is considered as
a step displacement. Once the desired output positional response and
its allowable steady-state error are specified, the corresponding K, of
the system is determined from Eq. (6-169); and by using Eq. (6-166),
the required behavior of G(z) at z = 1 is also determined.
2. Steady-State Error of Sampled-Data Systems with Ramp
Function Input
If the input to the sampled-data system in Fig. 6-41 is a ramp
function, r(t) = Rt, where R is in displacement/sec, the z-transform
of r(t) is given by
R(z) =
-
RTz
1)2
Substituting Eq. (6-170) into Eq. (6-163) yields
(6-170)
RT
e*
=
lim
21 (≈ − 1) [1 + G(z)]
Equation (6-171) can be written as
lim
---
1)
R
es
=
2-1
T
G(x)
(6-171)
(6-172)
Now, let the velocity error constant be defined as
Κο
=
then, Eq. (6-172) becomes
or
Ko
=
R
=
— lim [(x − 1)G(2)]
2-1
ex
-
R
Kv
་ ་
Desired output velocity
ess Steady-state error in displacement
(6-173)
(6-174)
(sec-¹) (6-175)
The steady-state error given in Eq. (6-174) is often referred to as
the velocity error. However, we should keep in mind that the velocity
error thus defined is not an error in velocity, but rather an error in
displacement due to a velocity (ramp) function input of the form of
r(t) = Rt. Figure 6-42 further clarifies this point by showing a
typical ramp input and the output response of a system at sampling
instants lags behind the input by an error in displacement when
steady state is reached.

210
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
c(t)|
ess = ess
Reference input、
r(t) = Rt
2T 3T
4T 5T
6T 7T 8T эт
Output sequence
c(nT)
Fig. 6-42 Output sequence of sampled-data system with ramp input.
3. Steady-State Error of Sampled-Data Systems With
Acceleration Function Input
Consider now that an acceleration input r(t) = Rt²/2_is_applied
to the system in Fig. 6-41. The z-transform of r(t) is
R(x) =
T²z(x + 1)
2(x-1)³
Therefore, the steady-state error at sampling instants is
R(z+1)
2→i (≈ − 1)²[1 + G(x)]
-
T2
ess =
lim
which can be written as
es
=
-
2-1
lim (z = D'G(z)
T2
R
2
Ка
Now, let the acceleration error constant be defined as
K₁ = — lim [(x − 1)²G(2)]
T2 2-1
Then, Eq. (6-177) becomes
ex = R/Ka
(6-176)
(6-177)
(6-178)
(6-179)
(6-180)
The acceleration error constant also has the significance of
Ka
=
R
=
Desired output acceleration
ess Steady-state error in displacement
(6-181)
In a similar manner, the steady-state error given by Eq. (6-180) is
called the acceleration error, which is an error in displacement due
to an acceleration function input.
From the foregoing discussions, we see that when the reference
input of a unity-feedback sampled-data system is of the step displace-
ment, ramp, or acceleration type, the steady-state error at the samp

Sec. 6.12
211
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
ling instants due to each input depends on the error constants Kp,
K., and Ka, respectively. The error constants are summarized as
follows:
(1) Positional error constant K = lim G(z)
(6-182)
2-1
(2) Velocity error constant K₁ = lim (≈ − 1)G(x)
-
(6-183)
T21
(3) Acceleration error constant
K. = — lim (≈
— lim (x − 1)²G(≈)
2-1
(6-184)
Steady-State Error Between Sampling Instants
In general, the steady-state error analysis given in the preceding
section is valid only for the error at the sampling instants. However,
when a system has a zero steady-state error at the sampling instants,
the error at other times is not necessarily also zero. A complete
description of the steady-state error may be made by use of the
modified z-transform. In Fig. (6-161) we see that the actual steady-
state error of a sampled-data system may be written as
lim e(t) = ess = lim e(nT, m) = lim (12')E(z, m) (6-185)
L→+00
71-400
2-1
where E(z, m) is the modified z-transform of e(t). However, in most
practical cases, the limit of E(z, m) as z approaches the limit of
unity, is independent of m, therefore, Eq. (6-185) and Eq. (6-161)
will yield identical results under this condition. As an illustration,
we may try to evaluate the steady-state error of the system in
Example 6-12. Since the system has hidden oscillation, the modified
z-transform technique was used in the example to compute the out-
put step response. The modified z-transform of the error signal is
written as
-
E(z, m) = R(z, m) — C(z, m)
(6-186)
For a unit-step displacement input, the modified z-transform of r(t)
is
(6-187)
R(z, m) = 1/(x − 1)
Substitution of Eq.
(6-187) and Eq.
(6-142) into Eq. (6-186) and
Eq. (6-185) yields
ess
=
lim e(nT, m)
=
lim (1
-¹)
7-0
0<m<
2-1
0<m<l
1
-
1)
=
lim 0.573(1 - z¯¹)
2-1
0<m<l

212
Chap. 6
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Z
(2
-
X
-0.05)
-
(z
-
22
-
1)e-31
Hence
ess =
1 - lim 0.573-
-
2-1
0<MAI
-зm (cos 2πm
0.5052 + 0.05
(≈ 0.05)
---
- 0.505z + 0.05
-
7.27 sin 2πm)
(6-188)
=
0
(6-189)
and the steady-state error of the system due to a unit step function
input is zero. Since Eq. (6-189) is not a function of m, it indicates
that the hidden oscillation is not carried into the steady-state and
that the correct result on the steady-state error of the system may
be obtained by use of the z-transforms.
Steady-State Error From Closed-loop Pole-Zero
Configurations
The relation between the error constants K,, K., and K. and the
poles and zeros of the closed-loop transfer function C(z)/R(2) pro-
vides useful information when analysis and synthesis of sampled-data
systems are effected in the z-plane utilizing the pole-zero concept.
Consider that the closed-loop transfer function relating to Fig.
6-41 is denoted by
C(z)
R(z)
=
m
KII (≈ - 21)
n
i=1
-
II (≈ − pi)
j=1
=
G(z)
1+G(z)
(6-190)
a
The relationships between the error constants Kp, K., and K. and
the poles and zeros p, and 2 are derived as follows:
(1) K, Taking the limit as z approaching unity in Eq. (6–190),
we have
lim
C(x)
=
lim G(z)
2-1
2-1 R(2) 1 + lim G(2)
2-1
=
Kp
1 + Kp
(6-191)
Thus, the positional error constant given in terms of the closed-loop
poles and zeros is
Kp
=
lim
C(2)/R(z)
=
2-11-C(2)/R(2)
n
―
i=1
21)
K II (1
II
m
II (1 − p₁) – K IĮ (1 − 2、)
j=1
i=1
(6-192)
(2) K.: For a unit-magnitude ramp-function input, the z-transform
of the error signal of the system in Fig. 6-41 is
E(x) =
―
Tz
(z 1)2
[1 − C(z)/R(z)] = R(2) − C(z)
-
(6-193)

Sec. 6.12
TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 213
Applying the final-value theorem to the last equation, we have
1
T
Ko
e* == lim
1
-
1)
C(z)
R(z)
(6-194)
--
For a finite nonzero velocity error, 1 − C(z)/R(z) must have a zero
at z =
1, or the steady-state error in Eq. (6-194) becomes infinite or
zero. Thus, Eq. (6-194) can be written as
1
-
est
-
Ko
= lim T-
2-1
d[C(2)
dz R(z)
(6-195)
Since we have assumed that the system has a finite velocity error,
the steady-state error sequence of the system corresponding to a step
displacement input must equal zero; that is,
lim C(z)/R(x) = 1
2-1
Equation (6-195) can now be written as
or
1
K&T
1
K&T
=
=
-
lim
2-1
d_C(z)/R(z)
dz
C(z)/R(z)
d C(z)
lim [In (e)]
2-1 dz R(z)
Substitution of Eq. (6-190) into Eq. (6-198) yields
(6-196)
(6-197)
(6-198)
lim {d[ln K + In (x − 21) + In (x − 22) + . . .
1
=
K&T
2-1
dz
-
+ In (z - 2m) - In (z p₁) In (≈ - P₂)
- -- ln
-
— In (x − P₂)]}
-
-
(6-199)
and it follows that
1
=
K&T
77
1
(1
-
P₁)
-
M
1
i=1
-
Zi)
(6-200)
(3) Ka: For an acceleration input, r(t) = t2/2; the steady-state
error sequence is given by Eq. (6-177). Or
e₁ 1²
= lim (x + 1) [1 - 0] =
-
T2
2
2-1
-
C(z) 1
R(z).
-
·
Ka
(6-201)
For a finite nonzero acceleration error, 1 C(z)/R(2) must have a
double zero at z = 1; otherwise, the steady-state error in Eq. (6-201)
is infinite or zero. Taking the second derivative with respect to z in
both the numerator and the denominator of Eq. (6-201), we have
e'ss
*****
1
Ka
=
T² lim {d[C(2)/R(2)]}
2-1
dz
(6-202)
In terms of the logarithmic derivative, the following relation is rec-
ognized:

214 TIME RESPONSE OF SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 6
d2
d2
C(z)
In
dz2 R(z)
dz2
[C(2)/R(2)]
d
2
C(x)/R(z)
dz
=
C(2)/R(z)
C(z)R(z)
It follows now that Eq. (6-202) is written as
d
1
=
Ka
d2 C(z)
T² lim In
2-1 dz2 R(z)
8]
=
dz
[ 2 [C(2)/R(2)]}]}
C(z)/R(z)
(6-203)
(6-204)
Differentiating the right-hand side of Eq. (6-199) with respect to z
and taking the limit as z approaches unity, Eq. (6-204) is written.
1
1
=
Ka
TZ
(1
-
1
21) 2
-
n
(1
-
1
P)
(6-205)
REFERENCES
Evans, W. R., "Graphical Analysis of Control Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 67,
1948, pp. 547-551.
Jury, E. I., "Additions to Notes on the Stability Criterion for Linear Discrete
Systems," I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, AC-6, September 1961, pp.
342-343.
Jury, E. I., "Correlation Between Root Locus and Transient Response of
Sampled-Data Control Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 75, Part 2, January 1956,
pp. 427-435.
Jury, E. I., "The Effect of Pole and Zero Locations on the Transient Response
of Sampled-Data Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 74, Part 2, March 1955, pp.
41-48.
Jury, E. I., "Hidden Oscillations in Sampled-Data Control Systems," Trans.
A. I. E. E., 76, Part 2, January 1957, pp. 391-394.
Jury, E. I., and Bharucha, B. H., "Notes on the Stability Criterion for Linear
Discrete Systems," I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, AC-6, February
1961, pp. 88-90.
Jury, E. I., and Blanchard, J., "A stability test for Linear Discrete Systems in
Table Form," I. R. E. Proc., 49, No. 12, December 1961, pp. 1947-1948.
Lindorff, D. P., "Application of Pole-zero Concepts to Design of Sampled-Data
Systems," I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, Dec. 1959, pp. 173-184.
Lindorff, D. P., and Johnson, G. W., “Transient Analysis of Sampled-Data
Control Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 73, Part 2, July 1954, pp. 147–153.
Marden, M., "The Geometry of the Zeros of a Polynomial in a Complex
Variable," Chapter 10, (New York: American Mathematical Society, 1949).
Mori, M., “Root Locus Method of Pulse Transfer Function for Sampled-Data
Control Systems," I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-3, November
1957, pp. 13-20.
Tou, J., "Stability Criterion for Digital Feedback Control Systems," Proc.
National Electronics Conf., 1956, 12, pp. 336–346.

•
FREQUENCY RESPONSE OF
SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
7.1 INTRODUCTION
In the preceding chapter time response of sampled-data systems
has been studied through the use of the z-transform or the modified
z-transform technique. The stability of closed-loop sampled-data
systems is investigated by application of the Schur-Cohn criterion or
the modified version of the Routh-Hurwitz criterion (the r-transforma-
tion) or Jury's criterion to the z-transform characteristic equations.
However, among the many techniques available for the analysis
and design of feedback control systems, the frequency response method
has proved quite popular. The basic features of the frequency response
method are that the description of the system is given in terms of
its response to sinusoidally varying input signals and that the sinus-
oidal steady-state behavior of the system is obtained by replacing
the Laplace operator s by jo in the system transfer function. As is
well known, the output response for linear systems with continuous-
data contains only the same frequency component as the sinusoidal
input signal, and only in systems with nonlinear elements may
harmonics or subharmonics of the input signal appear in the system
output. However, for linear systems with sampled-data, the sampler
acts as a harmonic generator so that the system output in general
may contain higher harmonics of the input. The main difficulty in
studying sampled-data systems by the frequency response method,
215

216 FREQUENCY RESPONSE
Chap. 7
therefore, stems from the fact that these high frequency components
in the system usually make the construction of the frequency loci plots
more difficult.
The study of sampled-data systems in the frequency domain
essentially relies on the extension of all the existing techniques
devised for the analysis of continuous-data systems. Some of the
well-known methods are:
1. The Nyquist Diagram
From the Nyquist diagram of the open-loop system transfer
function, the stability of the closed-loop system can be investigated.
The behavior of the Nyquist plot with respect to the (-1, 0) point
in the open-loop transfer function plane gives information on the
absolute stability as well as the relative stability of the system.
Frequency response characteristics of the system can also be obtained
directly from the Nyquist plot.
2. The Bode Diagram (Gain and Phase versus Log of Frequency)
The Bode diagram is a plot of the amplitude and phase angle
of the open-loop transfer function as a function of frequency (or
log of frequency) and may be used to investigate the absolute and
relative stabilities of the closed-loop system.
3. The Gain-Phase Plot
The gain-phase plot of the open-loop transfer function is used
to determine system stability by investigating the amplitude in db
versus the phase angle of the open-loop transfer function.
In the following sections, we shall see how the above mentioned
conventional methods may all be extended to aid the analysis and
design of sampled-data control systems.
7.2 THE NYQUIST PLOT
The Nyquist criterion is essentially a graphical study of the
stability of a closed-loop system. We have established in the preceding
chapter that the stability of linear control systems with continuous-
or sampled-data is determined by the location of the roots of the
characteristic equations. For a continuous-data system, all the roots
of the characteristic equation must lie in the left-half of the s-plane,

Sec. 7.2
217
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
whereas for a sampled-data system, the roots of the characteristic
equation must be found inside the unit circle /z/= 1 in the z-plane
for system stability. Let us consider the single-loop feedback systems
shown in Fig. 7-1 (a) and (b). For the continuous-data system,
the closed-loop transfer function is
R(s)
E(s)
G(s)
H(s)
-C(s)
R(s)
E(s) E (s)
G(s)
C(s)
H(s)
(b)
(a)
Fig. 7-1 Block diagrams of continuous- and sampled-data systems.
(a) Continuous-data control systems. (b) Sampled-data control
systems.
C(s)
G(s)
R(s) 1 + G(s)H(s)
(7-1)
and the closed-loop transfer function of the sampled-data system is
C* (s)
=
G*(s)
R* (s) 1 + HG*(s)
(7-2)
Eq. (7-1) makes clear that the relative and absolute stability of
the continuous-data system may be studied by constructing the
Nyquist plot (or Bode plot or gain-phase plot) for G(jw)H(jw).
Logically, the same procedure may be extended to sampled-data
systems by constructing the Nyquist plot for HG*(jw) or HG(z).
Because of the difference in the criterion on pole-zero locations.
in the s-plane and the z-plane, the Nyquist criterion must be restated.
for sampled-data systems.*
The Nyquist path originally defined in the s-plane for continuous-
data systems is shown in Fig. 7-2a. The path is described by four
separate sections and virtually encloses the entire right-half of the
S-plane with the exception of the origin and points on the imaginary
axis where the roots of the characteristic equation may locate. The
corresponding Nyquist path in the z-plane mapped by the z-trans-
formation is shown in Fig. 7-2b. The small semicircles at z = + 1
+ It is expected that the reader is familiar with the conventional Nyquist criterion
so that extension is made here only to the stability analysis of sampled-data systems.
The reader may refer to any standard text book on feedback control systems, such as
Automatic Control Systems by B. C. Kuo, Englewood, N. J., Prentice-Hall Inc., 1962,
for details of the derivation and applications of the conventional Nyquist criterion.

218
Chap. 7
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
jw
+ ∞
7
s-plane
(IV)
(I)
jus
8
Ro
6
75
7
4
-(II)
(IV)
4
-빨
​8
15
(III)
- 00
Im z
2-
plane
(III)
8/(1)
2-
Re z
3 (11)
3(11)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7-2 (a) The Nyquist path in the s-plane. (b) The Nyquist
path in the z-plane.
and other points on the path correspond to the small indentations
on the s-plane Nyquist path. The large circle of infinite radius in
the z-plane corresponds to the large semicircle (Sec. IV) in the
s-plane. The Nyquist path in the z-plane is not shown as a continuous
closed path because, corresponding to point (5) on the path in the
s-plane, the z-plane path jumps abruptly from the unit circle to the
infinite-radius circle and at point (7) the z-plane path jumps abruptly
back from the infinite circle to the unit circle. The exact place
where the jump occurs is indeterminate. However, the area that is
enclosed by the z-plane Nyquist path is the region between the two
circles. Later we shall see that though this Nyquist path appears
to be discontinuous, no difficulty results in the interpretation of the
stability to the Nyquist diagram.
The procedure and statement of the Nyquist criterion for sampled-
data systems are given as follows:
(1) The Nyquist path in the z-plane is defined as shown in Fig.
7-2b.
(2) The Nyquist plot of HG*(s) or HG(z) is constructed. This
is a plot of HG*(s) or HG(z) when z takes on the values along
the Nyquist path in the z-plane (or s takes on all values along
the path in the s-plane).
(3) The Nyquist criterion states that for a stable closed-loop
sampled-data system, the Nyquist plot for HG (2) must encircle the

Sec. 7.2
FREQUENCY RESPONSE 219
(-1,0) point of the HG(z) plane as many times as the number
of poles of HG(z) that are outside the Nyquist path in the z-plane,
and the encirclement (if there is any), must be made in the clock-
wise direction.
encirclement
In other words,
where
(MOJA +)
The Dove? [It HQ(2)] outside unit corell
N=
N = Z - P₁ noe poes [1++16(2)] (7-3)
(±)N= number of encirclement of the (-1, 0) point made by the HG(z)
Nyquist plot in the HG(z) plane. A positive sign for N corresponds
Ꮓ
P:
=
=
to counterclockwise (positive) encirclement, and a negative sign
for N means clockwise (negative) encirclement.
number of zeros of 1+ HG(z) that are outside the unit circle
(or enclosed by the Nyquist path) in the z-plane.
number of poles of 1 + HG(z) that are outside the unit circle
(or enclosed by the Nyquist path) in the z-plane. (The poles of
1 + HG(z) are the same as the poles of HG(z)).
Therefore, for a stable closed-loop system, Z must be zero; hence,
N
=
-
- P
(7-4)
Usually, if HG(z) does not
the z-plane, the system is
The Nyquist criterion for stability is then simplified to
have poles outside the unit circle in
said to be open-loop stable, and P = 0.
N = 0 }
(7-5)
which means that if the open-loop system is stable, the Nyquist plot
of HG(z) should not encircle (or enclose)‡ the (-1, 0) point at all
to ensure that the closed-loop system is also stable.
As the above discussion indicates, the application of the Nyquist
criterion to sampled-data systems is essentially an investigation of
the behavior of the Nyquist plot of HG(z) with respect to the
(-1, 0) point. Therefore, the major work in the application of the
Nyquist criterion is to construct the Nyquist diagram for HG(z);
once this is done, the stability condition of the closed-loop system
is determined by mere inspection of the diagram. However, the
plotting of the Nyquist diagram for sampled-data systems is compli-
cated by the fact that the pulse-transfer function HG*(s) is an
infinite summation of functions, due to the sampling operation. The
transfer locus can no longer be sketched for a sampled-data system by
"Enclosed" means encircled in the counterclockwise direction. The area that is
enclosed by a closed-path is always to the left of the path when one travels along the
path in the prescribed direction.
In this case, if HG(z) encircles the (-1,0) point at all, the direction must be
counterclockwise; and since N = Z = positive number, the point will be enclosed.
§ Transfer locus usually is considered only as a portion of the complete Nyquist
diagram. In the s-plane, the transfer locus of G(s)H(s) corresponds only to sections
I and III on the Nyquist path in the s-plane.

220
Chap. 7
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
mere inspection of the transfer function, at least not as simply as
in the continuous-data case, where the transfer locus may usually be
sketched by inspection of the form of the transfer function G(s)H(s)
of the system.
Three methods for the construction of the transfer locus of HG(z)
are discussed in the following:
Х
1. Two-Term Approximation Method
From Eq. (4-121), HG*(jw) is related to G(jw)H(jw) by
HG*(jw) = + Σ_ H(jw + jnw,)G(jw + jnw,)
T
(7-6)
which is an infinite sum of functions. Therefore, it seems that an
exact plot of HG*(jw) in any form would require the consideration
of an infinite number of terms from Eq. (7-6). However, we can get
a closer look at the problem by expanding Eq. (7-6) into the follow-
ing series:
HG*(jw) = +[G(jw)H(jw) + G(jw + jw.)H(jw + jws)
—
-
.]
(7-7)
+ G(jw − jws)H(jw − jws) + G(jw + j2ws)H(jw + j2ws)
+ G(jw – j2ws)H(jw – j2ws) +
In the majority of feedback control systems, the magnitude of
G(jw)H(jw) decreases rapidly as the frequency @ increases, with the
result that the higher frequency components in HG*(jw) are not
significant. Therefore, it is usually adequate to approximate HG*(jw)
by just the first few significant terms of the infinite series. As an
example, let the loop transfer function of a simple sampled-data
system be
G(s)H(s)
=
1.57
s(s+1)
(7-8)
and the sampling frequency w, is 4 rad/sec. As derived from Eq.
(7-7), the pulse transfer function of the sampled-data system is
HG*(jw) = = [G(jw)H(jw) + G(jw + j4)H( jw + j4)
w
+G( jw − j4)H( jw – j4)
+ G(jw+j8)H( jw + j8) + . . .]
For = 1 rad/sec, Eq. (7-9) becomes
HG*(j1) = — [G(j1)H(j1) + G( − j3)H( − j3)
T
+ G(j5)H(j5) + G(−j7)H( − j7) + . . .]
(7-9)
(7-10)

Sec. 7.2
221
FREQUENCY RESPONSE

51
1.5
B
HG(z) = plane
Wr
1.0
0.8
0.5
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
10.5
1.0
1.5
|
-0.5
1.25
0.8
-1.0
1.0
0.8
-1.5+
10
C
Fig. 7-3 Transfer loci for HG (x)
K = 1.57, T
=
=
A Exact plot
B-Two-term approx.
C - G(jw)H(jw)
0.792Kx
(≈ 1)(≈ 0.208)
1.57 sec.
But from the plot of G(jw)H(jw) shown in Fig. 7-3, the magnitudes
of G(j4)H(j4), G(j5)H(j5), . . ., and all other higher frequency
components are very small; hence, HG*(j1) can be approximated
by just the first two terms of the infinite series given in Eq. (7-10).
Similarly, for w = 2 rad/sec,
HG*( j2) = +[G(j2)H(j2) + G( − j2)H( − j2)
-
+G(j6)H(j6) + G( − j6)H( − j6) +
.]
≈— [G(j2)H(j2) + G( − j2)H( − j2)]
(7-11)
By taking the two most significant terms of each infinite series
of HG*(jw) for any given frequency w an estimate of HG* (jw₁)
may be obtained. The accuracy of the estimation of course depends
on how well the high frequency components are attenuated in the
system. Therefore,

222 FREQUENCY RESPONSE
Chap. 7
HG*(j3) ≈ —[G(j3)H(j3) + G(−j1)H(−j1)]
HG*(j4) = — [G(j4)H(j4) + G( − j0)H( − j0)]
(7-12)
(7-13)
HG*(j5) = — [G(j1)H(j1) + G(−j3)H( − j3)] (7-14)
The plot of HG*(jw) using the two-term approximation method
is shown in Fig. 7-3. As may be seen from this HG*(jw) plot, the
value of HG*(jw,/2) is real; at frequencies above w/2, the transfer
locus rises into the upper half plane and reaches infinity at
w = ws. For 0<ww./2, the HG*(jw) plot is an exact mirror
image of the locus in the upper half plane. Note that the transfer
locus for G(jw)H(jw) that corresponds to frequency range from
- ∞ to +∞ is single-valued, whereas the locus for HG*(jw) repeats
itself for every sampling frequency; that is, the plot of HG*(jw)
for 0 <ww, is identical to that for frequencies between w, and
2 ws, 2, and 3 ws, . . ., etc. This contrast is expected, since we have
established the fact that HG*(jw) is a periodic function with period
equal to jos.
@s
2. The z-Transform Method
An exact diagram for HG*(jw) can be drawn by considering
HG(z) instead of HG*(s). For the same system given in Eq. (7-8),
the z-transfer function is given by
0.792z
HG(2)
=
1.57
(≈ − 1)(≈ − 0.208)
(7-15)
From the s-z-plane mapping properties, the points on the unit circle
in the z-plane and the points on the jw axis of the s-plane are
joined by the following relations:
z= 1/90°
@=
ws/4
z=
1/180°
@=
2nws/4
z= 1/270°
w = 3nws/4
z= 1/360°
ω =ηως
where n is an integer. Therefore, for G(s)H(s) given by Eq. (7-8),
HG*(j1) = HG(1 / 90°)
=
=
0.863/-147°
0.792/90°
1.57 90° -1)(/90° -0.208)
(7-16)

Sec. 7.2
223
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
0.792/180°
HG*(j2) = HG(1 | 180°)
= 1.57
(2/180°)(1.280 / 180°)
= 0.515/180°
(7-17)
0.792/270°
HG*(j3) = HG(1 / 270°) = 1.57
(1.414/-135°)(1.02 / - 102°)
=0.863 / 147°
(7-18)
HG*(j4) = HG(/ 360°) = 1.57
0.792/360°
(0/360°)(0.792 / 360°)
= ∞ (7-19)
From these data, the exact plot of HG*(jw) is constructed in Fig
7-3.
A comparison of the transfer locus plots obtained from the two
preceding methods shows that there is a discrepancy between the
results. Individually the high frequency terms in HG*(jw) are not
significant, but the accumulated error is still large. Furthermore,
the approximated plot shows what purports to be a safer relative
stability margin than the actual plot and would endanger stability.
of the system in design.
3. The Bilinear Transformation Method
A still more convenient method in the construction of the transfer
locus for HG*(jw) is to utilize the bilinear w- or r-transformation
introduced in Sec. 6-6. Again, as in the extension of the Routh-
Hurwitz criterion, either the r- or the w-transformation may be
used. Let us use the r-transformation for the present illustration.
The r-transformation is characterized by
2=
r + 1
r 1
Substituting Eq. (7-20) into Eq. (7-15) yields
HG(z =
2=
r + 1
r
-
+1)
= 1.57
0.792(r + 1)(r − 1)
2(0.792r+1.208)
(7-20)
(7-21)
Now let r = jwr, where w, is the imaginary part of r. Then, Eq.
(7-21) becomes
HG* (jw)
=
1.57 (jw, + 1)(jw, − 1)
-
2
(jor +1.525)
(7-22)
jwr
where HG*(jw;) means HG (z = +1), but not HG*(s = jwr).
2=
jωτ
The amplitude and phase angle of HG*(jw,) when w, is varied from
-
-∞to +∞ are tabulated in the following:

224
Chap. 7
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
z=1
1
$ = +90°
3
=-90°
(a)
z plane
z plane
z=1+ €e³
Ꮎ
R∞
2
22
=0°
z = Rejo.
(b)
Fig. 7-4 (a) Section II of the Nyquist path in the z-plane. (b)
Section IV of the Nyquist path in the z-plane.
Οτ
HG*(jwr)
Οτ
HG* (jwr)
18
∞/-90°
0
0.515/-180°
-1
0.863/-147°
+1
0.863/147°
+∞
∞ / 90°
The transfer locus of HG*(jwr) obtained by means of the r-trans-
formation method is identical to that of HG*(jw) shown in Fig.
7-3 and obtained by the z-transform method. Similarly, we can show
that, if the w-transformation of z = (1+w)/(1 - w) is used, the
same plot of HG*(jw) would be obtained.
The complete Nyquist plot of HG(z) is obtained by considering
all the four sections of the Nyquist path in the z-plane. This involves
the addition of the HG(z) plot that corresponds to Sec. II and IV
to the transfer loci of HG(z) shown in Fig. 7-3.
An enlarged view of the small indentation of Sec. II of the
Nyquist path is shown in Fig. 7-4a. The points on this section may
be represented by
z = 1 + εe³
(7-23)
where tends to zero. As the tip of the small vector shown in Fig.
7-4a is moved from point (1) to point (3) along the small semicircle,
is varied from +90° to -90°. Substitution of Eq. (7-23) into
Eq. (7-15) yields
HG(z) = 1.57 x
0.792(1+ee³)
ee (0.792+ ee³)
Since tends to zero as a limit, Eq. (7-24) is written as
(7-24)
HG(z) = 1.57
0.792 1.57
=
Єe 0.792 €
(7-25)
Therefore, the magnitude of HG(z) on Sec. II of the Nyquist

Sec. 7.2
FREQUENCY RESPONSE 225
path is infinite (this is usually true for physical systems); and as
is varied from +90° through -180° (clockwise direction), the
HG(z) plot according to Eq. (7-25) will rotate through +180°
(counterclockwise) about the origin of the HG(z)-plane.
The Nyquist plot of HG(z) for Sec. IV on the Nyquist path
may be drawn in the similar manner as that for Sec. II. Referring to
Fig. 7-4b, the points on this infinite circle may be represented by
2= Rej
(7-26)
where R tends to infinity. As we travel from any point on this
large circle and back to the same point in the prescribed direction,
is varied through +360° (counterclockwise direction). Substitution
of Eq. (7-26) into Eq. (7-15) yields
HG(z) = 1.57
0.792 Re
(Re-1)(Re
1)(Re* — 0.208)
Thus, the Nyquist plot for HG(z)
corresponding to Sec. IV of
the Nyquist path should wrap
around the origin - 360° (clock- N = 0
wise) with zero magnitude. The
complete Nyquist plot for HG(z)
of Eq. (7-15) is now shown in
Fig. 7-5.
Z
=
=1.57 0.792
R
(7-27)
Im
HG (z) = plane
R∞
Re
N = O
P 0
ZAN
= 0
=
Fig. 7-5 Nyquist plot for HG(z)
0.792Kz
K = 1.57, T = 1.57
(≈ 1)(x − 0.208)
sec. The closed-loop system is stable.
The complete Nyquist diagram
may now be used to study the
stability of the open-loop and the
closed-loop sampled-data system.
The stability information obtained
from the HG(z) plot is actually
two-fold. From the origin of the
HG(2)-plane we may investigate
the stability of the function HG(z) itself, although in this case we
know that HG(z) is stable since it does not have any pole outside
the unit circle in the z-plane. In certain cases, the stability of HG(z)
should be determined before the stability of the closed-loop system
is analyzed. We may check the stability of HG(z) by investigating
the net number of encirclement of the origin made by the Nyquist
plot of HG(z). Since HG(z) made one clockwise and one counter-
clockwise encirclement of the origin, the net encirclement is zero;
therefore,
or
N=P-Z=0
P = Z
(7-28)
(7-29)

226 FREQUENCY RESPONSE
Chap. 7
where in this case,
N = the number of encirclement of the origin made by HG(z).
P the number of poles of HG(2) that are outside the unit
Z
=
=
circle.
the number of zeros of HG(z) that are outside the unit
circle.
This analysis of the HG(z) plot with respect to the origin in
the HG(z) is merely an interesting check of the Nyquist criterion
since P and Z are both equal to zero in this case as may be shown
by inspection of Eq. (7-15).
The stability of the closed-loop sampled-data system is now
determined from the number of encirclements of the (-1,j0) point
made by the HG(z) plot. From Fig. 7-5 we see that the (− 1, j0)
point is not encircled by the HG(z) plot at all; therefore, N (with
respect to the -1 point now) is equal to zero. But since P is zero
(the poles of 1 + HG(z) are the same as the poles of HG(z)), we
have
=
Z=0
This means that the closed-loop system is also stable (for K = 1.57
and T 1.57 sec). However, if the value of K is increased to 3.05
or greater, the HG(z) plot will pass through or encircle the (-1,j0)
point once; the encirclement is made in the counterclockwise direc-
tion. Hence,
N
Z-P=1
(7-30)
Since P is zero, we have Z = 1, meaning that the characteristic
Im
HG(z) = plane
R→∞
Re
-1
N = 1
N = O
P = 0
P = 0
Z = 1
Z = 0
Fig. 7-6 Nyquist plot for HG(z) :
=
(≈
The closed-loop system is unstable.
0.792Kz
1)(≈ 0.208)

Sec. 7.2
FREQUENCY RESPONSE 227
equation of the system has one root outside the unit circle in the
z-plane and that the closed-loop system is unstable. The Nyquist
plot of HG(z) for K = 5 is constructed in Fig. 7-6.
Normally, if the open-loop system is stable, only the unit circle
portion of the Nyquist path in the z-plane need be considered because
under this condition the open-loop transfer function HG(z) does
not have any pole outside the unit circle and P = 0. Usually the
zeros of HG(z) are determined by inspection of the transfer function;
thus the behavior of HG(z) with respect to the origin of the HG(z)
plane need not be investigated. Since the poles of HG(z) are
identical to the poles of 1 + HG(z), N must equal zero for the
closed-loop system to be stable. Therefore, if P = 0, the Nyquist
criterion may be stated as:
If a sampled-data system is open-loop stable, the closed-loop system
is also stable if the Nyquist plot of HG(z) that corresponds to
Sec. I, II, and III (the unit circle) on the Nyquist path in the z-
plane does not enclose the (−1,j0) point.
As another example, we may construct the Nyquist plot for the
same system discussed above but with a zero-order hold inserted in
the forward path. For this second-order sampled-data system with
zero-order hold, the open-loop z-transfer funcion is readily given by
Eq. (6-96).
K[(T − 1 + e¯”)z − Te¯" + 1 − e−″]
-
(7-31)
GLOG(2)
=
-
(≈ − 1)(z − e−¹)
-
For K = 1.57 and T =
1.57 sec,
GOG(z)
-
1.57 (0.778z+0.465)
(21)(≈ 0.208)
-
By means of the r-transformation, Eq. (7-32) is written as
GOG(jwr)
= 1.23 (jw, + 0.25)(j wr
(jor +1.525)
1)
(7-32)
(7-33)
From either Eq. (7-32) or Eq. (7-33), the Nyquist diagram for
GOG(z) is plotted as shown in Fig. 7-7. Since the poles of G₁0G(z)
are all located inside the unit circle in the z-plane, the open-loop
system is stable; only the Nyquist plot that corresponds to Sec. I
of the Nyquist path need be plotted (Sec. III gives the mirror image
of Sec. I). However, for completeness, the entire Nyquist plot
of GoG(z) is shown in Fig. 7-7. For the value of K chosen (1.57),
the Nyquist plot for Go(Gz) does not enclose the (-1,j0) point,
and the closed-loop system with zero-order hold is stable. However,
if the value of K is increased so that the GoG(z) plot now passes
through the negative real axis at a point to the left of the -1 point,

228
Chap. 7
FREQUENCY RESPONSE

-1.5
A
Wr
1.5
1.0
0.8
-1.0 -0.8
1.0
0.5
HG(z) = plane
1.5
0.5-
-0.5
-0.8
-1.0
-1.5 B
=
Fig. 7-7 Nyquist diagrams for sampled-data system. G(s)H(s) =
K
K = 1.57, T = 1.57 sec, curve A with zero-order hold,
s(s + 1)'
curve B without hold device.
the critical point (-1, j0) is encircled twice in the counterclockwise
direction (enclosed), and the closed-loop system is unstable. In this
case, P = 0, and N = 2; hence Z = 2; the closed-loop system transfer
function has two poles outside the unit-circle in the z-plane.
A comparison of the relative stability of the basic sampled-data
system with and without zero-order hold is made by drawing the
Nyquist diagrams of the two cases on the same set of coordinates
(see Fig. 7-7). The system without hold device definitely has a safer
stability margin. The gain margin and phase margin of the systems
can be determined in the usual manner.
Typical Nyquist plots for standard HG(2) (or G(2)H(z)) functions
are shown in Table 7.1 at the end of this chapter.

Sec. 7.3
FREQUENCY RESPONSE 229
Relationships Between Frequencies
From the discussions given in the above sections on the con-
struction of the transfer locus of HG(z) or HG*(s), we can see
that there are definite relationships among the frequencies w, wr,
ww, and w., where w, is the sampling frequency and wr, ww, and wo are
respectively the imaginary parts of r, w, and s. We shall now derive.
the frequency relationships as follows:
For the r-transformation,
z + 1
r=
Z
(7-34)
and for real frequencies,
z = e³wT
(7-35)
and
r = jw,
(7-36)
Hence Eq. (7-34) becomes
jw, =
ewr
jwT
-
+1
1
(7-37)
By means of simple trigonometric manipulations, w, is determined
from Eq. (7-37) as
Wr
--
=
cot
(으뜸​)
2
from which, if we solve for w,
(7-38)
@=
= 2/2 cot¯'(-
ως
-
cot ¹(-wr)
(7-39)
π
For the w-transformation,
Therefore,
-
ωω
and
w=
Im (w)
-
Z 1
2+1
=
W s
W
π
1
Οτ
=
= ---
1
r
(7-40)
tan
(7)
(7-41)
(7-42)
tan (ww)
From Eq. (7-39) and Eq. (7-42), the relationships between wr, ww,
w, and w, are established and are illustrated in Fig. 7-8.
7.3 THE BODE DIAGRAM
The Bode diagram can also be constructed for a sampled-data
system by use of the bilinear transformations. If the r-transformation
is used, the Bode plot of an open-loop transfer function HG(z) is

230 FREQUENCY RESPONSE
Chap. 7
-5
-
4
-3
-2
о
10
IN
2
3 4
5
∞
ωρ
1
1
-1/4 -1/3 -1/2
+00
+1
1/2 1/3 1/4
ww
έως 3ως
4ws
4
4
4
4
э
Fig. 7-8 Relationships between frequencies of s-, z-, w-, and r-
transformation.
given in terms of the magnitude of HG(z) in decibels and the angle
of HG(z) as functions of wr. For instance, the Bode plot of HG(z)
for the second-order sampled-data system discussed in the preceding
section may be drawn directly from Eq. (7–22); i. e.,
wr =
HG*(jwr)
==
-
1.57 (jw, + 1)(jw, − 1) ( ) (7-43)
2 (jw, +1.525)
-
T
-
Apparently, the corner frequencies of the plot are at w, = 1, 1, and
1.525. The asymptotes of the magnitude curves for (jo, - 1) and
(jw,+1) are identical, each with a slope of +20 db/decade of
frequency. Thus, the magnitude curve of (jw, + 1)(jw, − 1) at high
frequencies has an asymptote of slope equal to +40 db/decade of
frequency. The intersection of this asymptote with the w, axis is
at w, 1. The only difference between the Bode plots of these two
simple terms is in the phase shift curves. The phase shift of (jw, + 1)
varies from 0 to +90 degrees, whereas the phase shift of (jw, − 1)
varies from + 180 to 90 degrees as w, is varied from 0 to infinity.
Therefore, the phase shift curve of (jw, + 1)(jo, -1) is a horizontal
line at 180 degrees for all values of wr. The complete Bode plot
for HG*(jor) of Eq. (7-43) is now constructed in Fig. 7-9. For
this asymptotic plot, the gain margin of the system is measured to
be 5.77 db, and the phase margin of the system is approximately 40
degrees. The actual value of the phase margin should be some-
what less than 40 degrees since the actual point where the magnitude
curve crosses the 0 db axis would be at a lower frequency than the
crossover point made by the asymptotes used in the figure. As a
matter of fact, the exact phase margin found from the Nyquist plot
in Fig. 7-3 or Fig. 7-7 is approximately 35 degrees.
In a similar manner, the Bode diagram of the open-loop transfer
function of the system with zero-order hold is constructed in Fig.
7-10. The gain margin is about 2.5 db and the phase margin is 15
degrees.
From the discussions given above, we see that with the use of
て
​
Sec. 7.3
FREQUENCY RESPONSE 231
db
30
20
10
Gain margin
- 5.77
-10
- 20
-30
-40
1
0.01 0.02 0.05 0.1 0.2
0.5
1.0
2
270°
180°
90°
$.s.
0°
-90°
-180°
wr 1.525
Magnitude of HG* (jw)
52
10
20
50
100
Phase margin
Phase shift of HG*(jw,)
0.01 0.02
0.05 0.1 0.2
0.5
1.0 2
5 10 20
50
100
ωρ
Fig. 7-9 Bode diagram of sampled-data system with G(s)H(s)
= K/s(s + 1), K = 1.57 and T = 1.57 sec.
=
the r-transformation the Bode diagram for sampled-data feedback
control systems is constructed in much the same way as that for the
continuous-data systems. The Bode diagram has at least one attractive
feature over the Nyquist plot in the polar plane in that it may be
constructed by use of the asymptotes. We shall see later that the

232
Chap. 7
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
30
20
10
db
-10
-13.9
- 20
-30
-40
Gain margin
Magnitude of GnoG* (jw)
1
0.01 0.02 0.05 0.1 0.2
1
0.25
Wr
270°
180°
90°
0°
90°
180°
1
1
0.5 1.0 2
1.525
5 10 20 50 100
Phase margin
Phase shift of GoG* ( jur)
0.01 0.02 0.05 0.1 0.2
0.5
1.0
2
5 10 20
50
100
ωρ
Fig. 7-10 Bode diagram of sampled-data system with G(s)H(s)
=
= K/s(s + 1) and zero-order hold, K = 1.57, T
=
€ 1.57 sec.
Bode plot may also be conveniently used for the design and synthesis
of compensation of sampled-data systems.
7.4 THE GAIN-PHASE PLOT
The gain-phase diagram for an open-loop transfer function G(z)
is a plot of the magnitude of G(z) as a function of the phase shift

Sec. 7.4
FREQUENCY RESPONSE 233
of G(z), with frequency as a varying parameter on the locus. The
gain-phase plot of G(z) may be used together with the Nichols
chart to determine the frequency response of the closed-loop system.
For a basic sampled-data system with unity-feedback, the magni-
fication of the closed-loop system is given by
M =
=
C(z) G(z)
R(z) 1 + G(z)
(7-44)
where M is a function of complex variables. The magnitude and
phase shift of M, when plotted against frequency, represent the
frequency response of the closed-loop system. From the theory of
continuous-data systems, we know that the peak value of M(M,)
usually gives a qualitative measure of the relative stability of the
system. The optimum value of M, for most control systems should
lie within 1.1 and 1.5.
Let us now use the same system given in the preceding sections
to illustrate the construction of the gain-phase plot for G(2). Sub-
stitution of Eq. (7-22) into Eq. (7-44) yields
16
M = 2db
12
ወ
4.4
M = 3db
8
db
G(z)
3.4
K = 1.57
4
M = 4db
1.8
1.25
1.0
0.5
-4
wr=0
-8
270°
-240° -220° -200
-180°
Phase shift (degrees)
Nichols chart
(constant M loci)
-160°
-140°
-120°
Fig. 7-11 Gain-phase plot for sampled-data system with G(s) =
K
K = 1.57, T: = 1.57 sec.
s(s + 1)'
-90°
H. M. James, N. B. Nichols, and R. S. Phillips, Theory of Servomechanisms,
(New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1947).

234
Chap. 7
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
M =
-K(w + 1)
3.05j2w, K(w; + 1)
(7-45)
where in this case K is not yet specified. Examination of the last
equation shows that M can be greater than unity. Furthermore, if
the real and imaginary parts of the denominator of M are made
zero at the same frequency wr, the value of M becomes infinite.
This will occur when
w/
-
3.05
K
-
1 = 0
(7-46)
Therefore, M is infinite when w, is zero and when K is 3.05, and
the closed-loop system becomes unstable. These values of w, and K
check with the marginal value of K and or obtained from either
the Nyquist plot or the Bode diagrams presented earlier.
A plot of G(z) in gain-phase is now constructed in Fig. 7-11.
The plot is usually obtained by transferring the data from the Bode
plot of G(z). The Nichols chart is also superimposed on the gain-
phase plot to give information on closed-loop system frequency
response. It is seen that for K = 1.57, the peak resonance M, is
equal to 1.58, and the resonant frequency wrp is 0.97 (equivalent to
w = 3 rad/sec). From the gain-phase plot and the Nichols chart, the
closed-loop frequency response (M versus w,) is plotted in Fig. 7-12.
3.0
2.5
2.0
Mp=1.58
1.5
1.0
0.5
о
-3 -2
-1
1
2 3
4
ωρ
Fig. 7-12 Magnification curve (M versus w,) of sampled-data
system with G(s) = K/s(s + 1), K
-
1.57 and T
-
1.57 sec.

Sec. 7.5
FREQUENCY RESPONSE 235
7.5 MODIFIED Z-TRANSFORM ANALYSIS
The frequency response analysis of sampled-data systems conducted
in the preceding sections is based on the z-transform methods. For
systems with well behaved responses between sampling instants, the
z-transform method is of course quite adequate. But a general study
30
20
7.12.
5.5
10
m = 0.2
m = 0.3
O
-7.75-
-11.7-
-16.4-
10
m = 1.0
m = €0.5
Magnitude of G(z, m)
-20
m = 0.7
-30
-40
0.01
O.I
1.0
ωρ
10
100
360°
270°
Phase shift of G(z, m)
m = 1.0
180°
m =,0.7
90°
m = 0.5
0°
m = 0.3
m = 0.2
-90°
-180°
0.01
0.1
1.0
Wr
10
Fig. 7-13 Bode diagram of sampled-data system with G(s) =
27.8(s + 1) T = 1 sec and modified z-transform is used;
s(s² + 6s + 48.6)'
m =
0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and 1.
100

236
Chap. 7
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
of all systems, or of systems with hidden oscillations, must employ
the modified z-transform method. In this section, we shall show how
the modified z-transform method may be used to analyze sampled-
data systems in the frequency domain.
Let us consider the sampled-data system illustrated in Example
6-12. We know that the output response of the system due to a
unit step function input possesses hidden oscillations between
sampling instants. The z-transform analysis in this case predicted a
monotonically increasing time response, whereas the actual response
oscillates violently in between sampling instants. Clearly, if the
z-transform method is carried over to the frequency domain analysis
of the system, similar misleading information will result. However,
we shall show that by using the modified z-transform method, salient
characteristics of the system frequency response and relative stability
may be accurately anticipated.
For a sampled-data system with unity-feedback, the "magnification"
of the closed-loop system may in general be defined as

Wr
3.0
2.0
1+G
G(z)-plane
1.O
0.7
0.3
O
-1.0 -0.8 -0.6-0.4
-0.3
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
-0.7
-1.0
-2.0
-3.0
=
Fig. 7-14 Nyquist diagram of sampled-data system with G(s) =
27.8(s + 1)
s(s² + 6s + 48.6)'
and T 1 sec. from z-transform data.
=

Sec. 7.5
FREQUENCY RESPONSE 237
M(m) = C(x, m) = G(x,m)
R(z) 1 + G(z)
(7-47)
where M(m) is a function of m and frequency. Since the numerator
of Eq. (7-47) contains the modified z-transform of G(s) and since
the denominator has the ordinary z-transform, the Nichols chart
cannot be used for the determination of M(m). However, if G(z, m)
is constructed in the Bode diagram for several values of m(0<m< 1)
and if the plot of G(z) is made in the polar coordinates, the plot
of M(m) versus frequency may be constructed without much difficulty.
The Bode plots of G(z, m) are drawn in Fig. 7-13 for m = 0.2,
0.3, 0.7, and 1.0; and the transfer locus for G(z) is plotted in Fig.
7-14. From these plots the magnification curves for the various
values of m are drawn in Fig. 7-15. For m = 0.2, the sampled output
c(t)
3
c(nT, m)
C(t)
2-
0.2
1.2
2.2
3.2
4.2
Output step response
2
1
Mp = 3.08
T
1
1
1
-6 -5 -4
-3 -2 -1
1 2
3
4
5 6
ωρ
M(m) versus frequency
Fig. 7-15a Magnification curve and the corresponding time response
from modified z-transform with m = 0.2 of the sampled-data
system with G(s)
=
27.8(s + 1)
s(s² + 6s + 48.6)'
T = 1 sec.

238
Chap. 7
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
3
2
c(t)
3.3
4.3
0.3
1.3
2.3
Output step response
3-
2
1
Mp = 2.55
L
1
1
-6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1
0 1
2
3
4
5
6
Wr
M(m) versus frequency
Fig. 7-15b Magnification curve and the corresponding time response
from modified z-transform with m = = 0.3 of the sampled-data
system with G(s)
27.8(s + 1)
s(s² + 6s+ 48.6)'
T = 1 sec.
gives the peak overshoots of the hidden oscillation during each
sampling period, and the corresponding M(m) versus or plot indi-
cates a peak resonance M, of 3.08. For other different values of m
the corresponding M(m) curves are all different. For m = 0.7 and
1.0, the time responses at sampling instants erroneously predict an
overdamped system, and the corresponding M(m) curves exhibit no
resonant peaks at all.

Sec. 7.5
239
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
c(t)
3.
c(nT, m)
c(t)
2-
0.7
1.7
t
2.7
3.7
Output step response
21
1-
0.206
1
-5 -4 -3 -2 -1
о
2
3
4
5
6
ωρ
M(m) versus frequency
Fig. 7-15c Magnification curve and the corresponding time response
from modified z-transform with m = 0.7 of the system with
sampled-data and G(s) =
27.8(s + 1)
s(s² + 6s + 48.6)'
T = 1 sec.
REFERENCES
Boxer, R., "Analysis of Sampled-Data Systems and Digital Computers in the
Frequency Domain,” I. R. E. Convention Record, Part 10, 1955, pp. 73–85.
Linvill, W. K., "Sampled-Data Control Systems Studied Through Comparison
of Sampling With Amplitude Modulation," Trans. A. I. E. E., 70, Part 2,
1951, pp. 1779-1788.
Salzer, J. M., "Frequency Analysis of Digital Computers Operating in Real
Time," Proc. of the I. R. E., 42, February 1954, pp. 457-466.
Salzer, J. M., "Treatment of Digital Control Systems and Numerical Processes
in the Frequency Domain," MIT Digital Computer Lab. Report R-225,
J. W. Craig, ed. 1952.
Wadel, L. B., “Analysis of Combined Sampled-and-Continuous-Data Systems
on an Electric Analog Computer," I. R. E. Convention Record, Part 4, 1955,
pp. 3-7.

240 FREQUENCY RESPONSE
Chap. 7
c(t)
c(nt, m) c(t)
2-
T
2T
3T
4T
Output step response
2
1
0.352
1
-6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1
O
1
2
3
4 5 6 7
r
M(m) versus frequency
Fig. 7-15d Magnification curve and the corresponding time response
from modified z-transform with m =
1.0 (same as z-transform)
of the sampled-data system with G(s):
T= 1 sec.
=
27.8(s + 1)
s(s² + 6s+ 48.6)'
and

Sec. 7.5
FREQUENCY RESPONSE 241
TABLE 7-1
G(s) = K/s
G(x)
=
Kz
Z-
- 1
K(r + 1)
G(r)
=
Im
w G(jw)
Im
O
W = ∞
Re
8-3
G(jw)
w₁ = 0
0.5K Re
Wr
3340
G(s) = K/s²
G(z)
=
KTz
(x-1)²
G(r)
-
KT (r² − 1)
2
-
Im
G(jw)
w₁ = 0
Im
G(jw)
++
Re
-KT
O
Re

242
Chap. 7
FREQUENCY RESPONSE
K
G(s) = 5a (a > 0)
s+a
TABLE 7-1 (continued)
G(z)
=
z-
Kz
e-ar
G(r)
=
(A
K(r + 1)
(1 − e−aT) (r + A)
1+e-ar
= 1- e-ar
Im
G(jw)
Im
+ Wr
-ω
843
+w
340
Re
ωρ
∞
@r=
K
A(1-e)
Wr
K
1-e-T
G(s)
G(r)
=
=
K
(s + a) (s + b)
G(x)
=
Kz(e-ar — e-b″)
-
(b − a)(z − e−aT) (z − e−dT)
K(r² - 1)(e-ar — e-bT)
(1 − e−ar)(1 − e−¹º) (r + A)(r + B)(b − a)
-
(A = 1 + e-a7)
1+
(B = 1 + 6 = 37)
-
Im
G(jw)
-ω
W
∞
+ W
Im
G(jw)
+wr
ab
18
w=0
Re
-K(e-at-e-bT)
(b-a)(1+e-aT)(1+e−bT)
-Wr
ωρ
Re
K(e-at-e-bT)
(b-a)(1-e-aT)(1-e-bT)

Sec. 7.5
FREQUENCY RESPONSE 243
G(s)
=
K
s(s + a)
TABLE 7-1 (continued)
G(x)
=
K(1 − e−aT)z
a(z − 1) (z − e−aT)
G(r)
=
K(r² - 1)
2a (r+ A)
(A = 1 + e-a7)
3—8
+w
# K
Re
Im
G(jw)
G(jw)
+wr
wr=0
0∞ = +∞0
2aA
-wr
Im
K
G(s) = 5² (s + a)
040
+w
G(z)
G(r)
-
=
KTz
K(1 − e−aT)z
-
a(z — 1)² — a²(z − 1)(x − e−aT)
-
KT(r² − 1) r + (TaA − 2)/Ta
4a
r+ A
Im
1+e-ar
A =
Im
G(jw)
W
∞
∞
+00+wr
+00+wr
@₁ = 0.
(4 > 247)
+ wr
+wr
ωρ
G(jor)
-KT (A-2/aT)
4aT
→8
Wr
(A<27)

244 FREQUENCY RESPONSE
Chap. 7
TABLE 7-1 (continued)
G(s)
=
K
s (s + a) 2
K2(1.
e-ar
G(z)
=
aTe-ar)(x+
G(r) = K' (r² — 1) (r + C)
(r + A)²
-
K' K
(1 − e-ar
=
-
aTe-ar)
2a (1-e-ar)?
A
=
1 + e-ar
1 e-ar
+∞
Wr
-C>O
+ wr
+∞0
-wr
e-2aTaTe-ar
1- e-ar aTe-ar
(≈ − 1)(z − e−ar)²
1- 2aTe-ar
C
=
C<O
Im
w, =/A2-2AC
Wr
wr
-
e-ar-e-27
1 − e−ar + e-2ar
W
Im
G(jw)
+w
G(ju)
843
Wr
= 0
Re
-K'C
42
Re

8
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
OF SAMPLED-DATA SYSTEMS
BY CONTINUOUS NETWORKS
8.1 INTRODUCTION
Generally all performance specifications given on the steady-state
and transient responses of a feedback control system cannot be satis-
fied simultaneously given only the basic fixed elements over which
the engineer has little or no control. Although the adjustment of
the loop gain would seem to be a simple way of changing the system
performance, this adjustment is very seldom satisfactory as a means
of improving the system, except perhaps in very trivial situations.
For instance, if the system loop gain is increased to reduce the
steady-state error, the transient response usually will become more
oscillatory, or the system may even become unstable. Therefore, in
control system engineering, compensating devices must frequently be
introduced whose function is not only to provide absolute stability
but more important to meet specifications called for on the steady-
state as well as the transient performances.
Basically, the principle of compensation of sampled-data systems is
similar to that of systems with continuous-data. Regardless of whether
the sampling operation is inherent or purposely introduced into a
system, the output step response of a sampled-data system is usually
continuous with respect to time and is characterized by the usual
terms of specifications, such as percent overshoot, response time, rise
245

246
Chap. 8
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
time, delay time, steady-state error, etc. Therefore, the system should
be compensated so that all these quantities lie within the specified
margins. However, due to the sampling operation, the design of the
compensation networks for sampled-data systems does present more
problems and difficulties than for systems without sampling. The
possibility of using computers as compensating elements has also
made the design of sampled-data systems more versatile and interesting.
Whenever the preliminary studies made on a certain sampled-data
system reveal that the over-all system performance does not satisfy
the given specification, compensation should be employed. Theoreti-
cally, compensation of sampled-data control systems may be incorpo-
rated in any suitable manner, but the following methods are the most
common.
1. Cascade Compensation
Compensating elements are inserted in the forward path of a
sampled-data system. The following two schemes may be used:
Compensating
elements
Controlled
system
R(s)
E(s) E*(s)
T
Ge(s)
G₁(s)
C(s)
Continuous
signal
Feedback
elements
H(s)
(a)
Synchronized
samplers
Controlled
system
R(s)
E(s)
D(s)
G₁(s)
·C(s)
Digital
controller
H(s)
(b)
Fig. 8-1 Cascade compensation of sampled-data systems. (a)
Continuous network compensation. (b) Digital network compen-
sation.

Sec. 8.1
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION 247
(a) Compensation by Continuous Networks. In this method contin-
uous-data networks or devices such as those used in continuous-data
control systems are connected in series with the elements of the
controlled system (Fig. 8-1a).
(b) Compensation by Digital Networks. In this method, digital
controllers or networks are employed as compensating elements. The
input and output signals of a digital controller are all in pulsed form.
A digital network may be a network with synchronized samplers
located at the input and output terminals of the network, or in
general, it can be a special-purpose digital computer or a portion of
a general-purpose digital computer. A sampled-data control system
with cascaded digital controller is illustrated in Fig. 8-1b.†
2. Feedback Compensation
This includes inserting compensating elements in the feedback
path, or forming additional minor feedback loops and other more
complex measures such as the conditional feedback. A sampled-data
system with conditional feedback is illustrated in Fig. 8-2.
R(s)
H₁(s)
T
H₂(s)
D*(s)
IN(s)
+
G(s)
C(s)
+
Fig. 8-2 Sampled-data system with conditional feedback.
In this case, it is also appropriate to regard the system as a continuous-data
system with digital controller or digital computer compensation.
G. Lang & J. M. Ham, "Conditional Feedback Systems-A New Approach to
Feedback Control,” A. I. E. E. Trans. Part 2, Vol. 74, 1955, pp. 152–161. D. R. Katt,
"Conditional Feedback Systems Applied to Stabilizing a Missile in Pitch Attitude,"
WESCON Convention Record, 1957, pp. 171–175.

248
Chap. 8
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
3. Multirate Sampling Compensation
The performance of certain sampled-data systems may be improved
by use of a multirate controller which has samplers at its input and
output; the samplers do not operate with the same sampling rate.
In general, the multirate controller may be located in either the
forward or the feedback path. A typical control system with multi-
rate controller is illustrated in Fig. 8-3.
Multirate Controller
R(s)
E(s)
D*(s)
S
G₁(s)
-C(s)
T/n
T
H(s)
Fig. 8-3 Sampled-data with multirate controller.
As far as the design techniques are concerned, we recall that the
design of systems with continuous-data is usually carried out either
in the frequency domain or the time domain (s-plane). This is also
true for the compensation and design of sampled-data systems, in
view of the fact that we have extended most of the conventional
methods such as the Bode plot, Nyquist plot, root locus diagram,
etc., to the sampled-data case. In terms of the Bode plot and the
Nyquist plot, the compensation of sampled-data systems essentially
involves the reshaping of the original system locus until the desired
values for M,, phase margin, gain margin, and bandwidth are obtained.
In terms of the root locus diagram, we are working with virtually the
pole-zero configuration of the closed-loop transfer function that gives
information on the frequency response as well as the time response.
By adding poles and zeros at proper places in the z-plane, the root
loci of a sampled-data system may be reshaped so that the corre
sponding system has improved behavior.
In the present chapter, only the compensation with continuous
networks will be discussed. Digital compensation and other techniques
will be covered in Chapter 9.

Sec. 8.2
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION 249
8.2 CASCADE COMPENSATION BY CONTINUOUS-DATA
NETWORKS
A sampled-data control system with a cascade continuous-data
compensating network G.(s) is shown in Fig. 8-4. Since the com-
pensating network is connected directly to the zero-order hold and
the controlled system, the z-transform of the open-loop transfer
function is
C(z)/E(z) = Z[Gro(s) Ge(s) G1(s)] = GnoGeG1(z)
(8-1)
The main objective of continuous-data compensation is to select a
realizable network with transfer function Ge(s), which will cause the
sampled-data system to perform satisfactorily when inserted in it
as shown in Fig. 8-4. However, as Eq. (8-1) shows, the compen-
Zero-order Compensating Controlled
hold
network
system
R(s)
E(s)
Ts
1-e
H(s)
Gc (s)
G₁(s)
-C(s)
S
Fig. 8-4 Sampled-data system with continuous-data compensation.
sating network function G.(z) cannot be derived and separated from
the over-all expression Gho GeG₁(z): hence the influence of various
forms of Ge(s) on the over-all system behavior is not apparent.
Therefore, the effort of selecting a suitable Ge(s) usually involves
the construction of the transfer locus of Go GeG₁(z) (if the frequency
domain method is used) each time a new compensating network is
suggested. Perhaps only after the construction of quite a few
GoGe G1(2) plots can an intelligent choice of Ge(s) be made. For
this reason, although cascade compensation by means of continuous-
data networks may seem to be the simplest method to carry out, the
design technique is far from being as straightforward as its counter-
part in continuous-data control systems.
Several approximation methods in regard to the design of contin-
uous-data compensation as shown in Fig. 8-4 have been devised in
the literature, but none can be regarded as really satisfactory.
+ W. K. Linvill, “Sampled-Data Control Systems Studied Through Comparison of
Sampling with Amplitude Modulation," Trans. A. I. E. E., 70, Part 2, 1951, pp. 1779-
1788. E. I. Jury, Sampled-Data Control Systems (New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
1958), Chapter 6.
‡ J. R. Ragazzini & G. E. Franklin, Sampled-data Control Systems (New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1958, pp. 123–129.

250
Chap. 8
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
Either the approximation is too rough, or the amount of work in-
volved in the design is still overwhelming. For the purpose of
illustration, the continuous-system approximation method: is described
in the following.
In the continuous-system approximation method, the sampler and
the zero-order hold are approximated by a pure time delay equal to
one-half the sampling period of the system. The approximating system
is then a continuous system with time delay, and the conventional
design techniques may be used.
Let us consider the system shown in Fig. 8-4. The transfer func-
tion of the zero-order hold has been given in Eq. (3-10) as
Gre(jw) = Tsin (@T) μ-07 2
ωτ
(8-2)
By definition the open-loop pulse-transfer function of the system is
given by
1
GìG&G† (jw) = = Σ Gra(jw + jnw,)G.(jw + jnw,)G,(jw + jnw;)
T
Substitution of Eq. (8-2) into Eq. (8-3) yields
N = ∞
G₁G.G† (jw) = = Σ t
ΙΣΤ
N=18
sin(
w + nws
2
)T
e−j(w+nw₁) T, 2
T
w + nws
2
× Gc(jw + jnw,)G₁(jw + jnws)
(8-3)
(8-4)
If the controlled system G.(jw) has low pass characteristics (which
is true for most servo systems) and if at low frequencies sin ¦(w +
nw,)T/½ (w + no,)T equals about one, we can approximate GoGc G* (jw)
by just the first term of its series expansion. Hence
GoGeG(jw) = e¯jwT/2Gc(jw) G₁(jw)
(8-5)
Therefore, the sampler and the zero-order hold are approximated by
a time lag of one-half the sampling period T, and the approximating
R(s)
E(s)
e¯jwT/2
H(s)
Gc(s)
G₁(s)
C(s)
Fig. 8-5 Continuous-system approximation of the sampled-data
system shown in Fig. 8-4.
In general, this approximation is questionable, since otherwise we can apply this
method to all sampled-data systems and there would be no need to devise the z-trans-
form technique or any other efforts for the studies of sampled-data systems.

Sec. 8.2
251
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
linear continuous-data system is as shown in Fig. 8-5. The real
significance of this pure time-delay approximation is now depicted by
the sketch of a hypothetical signal at the output of the zero-order
hold as shown in Fig. 8-6. The hold circuit output, which is a stair-
case wave, may be roughly approximated by a smooth curve passing
through the center of each step during a sampling period. This is
of course equivalent to delaying the sampler input by one-half the
sampling period.
h(t)↑
e(t)
,h(t)
e(t)
Approximated h(t)
6T
7T 8T
O T 27 3T 4T 5T
Fig. 8-6 Waveforms showing the approximation of the sampler
and the zero-order hold by a pure time delay of T/2.
Example 8-1
To illustrate the application of the continuous-system approximation method
described above, the transfer function of the controlled system of the sampled-
data control system in Fig. 8-4 is given as
G₁(s) = K/[s(s + 1)]
(8-6)
where K = 1.57 and T
=
1.57 sec. The approximating continuous model of
the uncompensated system (open-loop) is represented by
G10G (jo) = e¯jwT/2G₁(jw)
Substituting Eq. (8-6) into Eq. (8-7), we have
GoG (jw) = e¯jwT/2 K/[jw(jw + 1)]
(8-7)
(8-8)
The Bode plot of GoG (jw) is now constructed in Fig. 8-7 for the specified
values of K and T. From the plot we see that the phase margin of the un-
compensated system is approximately 0 degree. Note that the exact plot of
Gho G (j) of this system shown in Fig. 7-10 gives a phase margin of approxi-
mately 15 degrees. As can be shown, the continuous-system approximation
described by Eq. (8-5) usually gives a pessimistic representation of the system
stability. Furthermore, the phase shift curve of GoG (jw) is discontinuous at
@ = ws 4 rad/sec, since the term sin (@T)/T changes sign at the
sampling frequency.
=
Let us assume that the specification calls for a phase margin of at least 45
degrees. We may, at this point, investigate the possibility of using either a
phase-lead or phase-lag network for the continuous compensation. Because of
the rapid increase in phase lag at frequencies above 1 rad/sec, a phase-lead

252 DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
Chap. 8
network may not be effective in improving the phase margin of this system.
(As is well known, phase-lead compensation would increase the gain crossover
frequency and therefore would make the addition of more phase lead less
effective if the phase shift of the uncompensated system decreases very rapidly
in the vicinity of the new gain crossover.) A phase-lag compensation would
seem to be more appropriate for the compensation of this system.
A typical phase-lag network is given by the following transfer function:
1+ aTS
1+ TS
Go(s)
=
(8-9)
60
db
40
20
O
Magnitude curve of Gho G₁(jw)
of uncompensated system
-20
-40
Magnitude curve of
| phase-lag network
Magnitude curve of GhoGc G
of compensated system
-60
-80
ως
-100
0.01
0.02 0.05 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 2
0.016 0.04
5
10 20
50 100
4
@rad/sec

-90°
-180°
Phase shift
Phase
margin 45°
of Gho Gc G₁(jw)
of compensated
system
-270°
-360°
Phase shift of 1/(s+1)s
Phase margin of
uncompensated system = 0°
Phase shift of uncompensated
system
-Phase shift is
discontinuous here
0.01 0.02 0.05 0.1
0.2
0.5 1.0 2
5
10 20
50
100
4
@rad/sec
Fig. 8-7 Bode plots of sampled-data system in example 8-1. G(s)
Ks(s+ 1), K = 1.57, T = 1.57 sec. Phase-lag compensation.
=

Sec. 8.3
253
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
where a and 7 are constants and a is always less than unity. From the Bode
plot of the uncompensated system, we see that the phase margin of 45 degrees
may be realized if the gain crossover frequency is moved from the present
value (approximately 1 rad/sec) to a frequency of 0.5 rad/sec. Since the phase
lag of the compensating network will also have some effect on the final phase
shift curve of the compensated system, as a standard practice the new gain
crossover should be selected at a frequency somewhat lower than 0.5 rad/sec,
say w 0.4 rad/sec. From the Bode plot in Fig. 8-7, the gain of G₁G*(jw)
at this new gain crossover is about 8 db. Thus the phase-lag network must
produce 8 db of attenuation at the new gain crossover frequency. Hence
20 log 10 a
=
- 8 db
Solving for a from the last equation yields
a = 10-8/20
= 10-0.4 =
0.4
(8-10)
(8-11)
This fixes the distance between the two corner frequencies of the lag network.
To determine the exact location of the two corners, it is necessary to locate
the upper corner frequency 1/aT at such a place that the phase lag contributed
by the lag network is negligible at the new gain crossover. This is done by
placing the upper corner at a frequency which is equal to 1/10 times the new
gain crossover frequency. Therefore,
1
ω! 0.4
ат 10 10
-
0.04 rad/sec
(8-12)
and the lower corner frequency of the lag network is determined readily from
1/T
-
0.04a
=
0.016 rad/sec
(8-13)
Substituting the values of a and 7 determined from above into Eq. (8-9), the
transfer function of the phase-lag compensating network is.
Ge(s) =
1 + 25s
1 + 62.5s
(8-14)
The magnitude and phase shift plots of the compensated system transfer
function Gho GG* (jw) are sketched in Fig. 8-7. The phase margin of the
compensated system is equal to about 45 degrees as required.
8.3 CASCADE COMPENSATION BY BILINEAR
TRANSFORMATION METHOD†
The reasons for the rather wide spread use of frequency domain
design techniques for continuous-data systems are quite obvious. First,
the method guarantees at the outset of the design that the com-
pensating network is of a realizable form (preferrably of the RC
type); and second, successive application of the cut-and-try process
† M. P. Pastel and G. J. Thaler, "Sampled-Data Design By Log Gain Diagrams,"
I. R. E. Transactions on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-4, No. 2, Nov. 1959, pp. 192–197.

254
Chap. 8
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
can be quickly made in the Bode diagram and the Nichols chart. We
have demonstrated in the last section that for the design of sampled-
data systems the above mentioned advantages are preserved only if
certain approximation schemes are adopted. Without approximation
the Bode diagram method cannot be employed, and furthermore,
directly connecting a continuous compensating network into the
sampled-data system requires complete recalculation of the system
z-transfer function.
In the preceding chapters the bilinear transformation z = (r + 1)/
(1) has been used to convert z-transform function G(z) of a
sampled-data system into a new function G(r), which is a rational
function in variable r. This bilinear r-transformation maps the unit
circle in the z-plane onto the imaginary axis in the r-plane. There-
fore, the Bode diagram of G(r) can be drawn in log of magnitude
and phase against frequency. Then, by use of the Nichols chart and
correlation information available from continuous-data system, the
dynamic behavior of the closed-loop sampled-data system can be
predicted from the G(r) plot and the Nichols chart.
In this section we shall present a straightforward method of
designing sampled-data control systems with continuous-data network
utilizing the r-transformation. The method does not rely on any
approximation of the sampling operation and has all the advantages
of the frequency design of continuous-data systems.
The block diagram of the system under consideration is shown
in Fig. 8-8, in which G₁(s) and G.(s) are the transfer functions of
R(s)
E(s)
Gho(s)
Zero-order
hold
Gc(s)
Compensating
network
G₁(s)
Controlled
system
C(s)
Fig. 8-8 Sampled-data control system with continuous-data
compensation.
the controlled system (fixed elements) and the compensating network,
respectively. The proposed steps of design are as follows:
(1) Determine the r-transform function GoGi(r) of the system.
without compensation by substituting z = (r + 1)/(r− 1) into
Gho G1(z).
(2) Construct the Bode diagram for GhoG₁(r) and transfer the
log magnitude and phase versus w, loci to the Nichols chart. Predict
the dynamic behavior of the uncompensated system by evaluating the
phase margin, gain margin, peak resonance, resonant frequency, and
bandwidth from the Nichols chart.

Sec. 8.3
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION 255
(3) Should the system need improvement, a compensating function
G(r) of the form of (1 + arr)/(1 + Tг) or (1 + aтır)(1 + bτ₂r)/
(1 + t₁r)(1 + Tar) or any other more complex type, if necessary, is
multiplied to GhoGi(r) to reshape the transfer locus of the uncom-
pensated system. These compensating functions in the r-domain, in
general, can be classified as phase-lead, phase-lag, or lead-lag con-
figurations. But they may have no direct significant correlation of
phase-lead or phase-lag in the s-plane. The purpose of identifying
G(r) in the r-domain is purely for the use of the knowledge of
continuous-data systems compensation in regard to the effects of
phase-lead and phase-lag networks on the system transfer locus. The
transfer function of the actual compensating network in s, Ge(s) is
determined from taking the inverse transform of Ge(r) GOG₁(r), or
Ge(s) Go(s) G₁(s) = inverse transform of [G(r)GoGi(r)] (8-15)
Since Go(s)G(s) is known, Ge(s) is readily obtained from the last
equation.
However, the physical realizability of G.(s) must always be kept
in mind. Furthermore, if possible, Ge(s) should be realized by RC
elements. In order for G.(s) to be RC realizable, the following re-
quirements are necessary:
(a) The poles of Ge(s) must lie in the left-half of the s-plane
and must be simple and real.
(b) The number of poles of G.(s) must be greater than or at
least equal to the number of zeros of Ge(s).
The zeros of Ge(s) may lie anywhere in the s-plane. Therefore,
the poles of Ge(s) must be restricted to the negative real axis of the
s-plane. Since the poles of G.(s) are generated by the poles of G‘(r),
it follows that G(r) must have only simple poles to the left of the
-1 point on the real axis in the r-plane (see Fig. 8-9).
(4) Once G(r)GoG(r) is determined, take the inverse transform.
to obtain Ge(s) Go(s) G1(s). It should be noted that since
s-plane
r- plane
Poles of
Gc(s)
Poles of
Gć (r)
Fig. 8-9 Locations of the poles of G¿(s) and G(r) in the s-plane
and the r-plane for RC realizability.

256 DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
Chap. 8
G(r)GoG₁(r) = [GeGoG1(2)] 2=(+1)/(7-1)
Ge(r) = 3[Ge(s)]:=(r+1)/(r−1)
(8-16)
(8-17)
The z-transform of the uncompensated open-loop transfer function
can be written
GOG₁(2) (1
=
-
(-1) 3 [G₁(s)]
In terms of the r-transforms, we have
G10G1(r) = {(1 -
= {(1 − 2-¹) 3 [ G₁(.
=
2
r+
13
G₁(s)
z=(r+1)/(r-1)
S
| z = (r + 1), ' (r − 1)
(8-18)
(8-19)
After compensation, the r-transform function of the open-loop system
is
Ge(r) GhoG(r) = G10 GeG₁(r)
2
=
13 [ G.(s) G₁(s)].
} z = {r + 1), (r− 1)
or
3[G₁(s) G₁(s)]
r+ 1
r+¹Ge(r) G₁0G₁(r)
=
|2 = (r+ 1), (r−1)
2
(8-20)
(8-21)
The function G.(s)G₁(s)/s is found from Eq. (8-21) by making
the partial fraction expansion of (r + 1) G.(r) GoG₁(r)/2 and finding
the corresponding pairs of functions in s. A table of the Laplace-z-r
transform functions is given in Table 8-1 for this purpose. Investi-
gating the transform pairs of G(s) given in Table 8-1, we see that
when G(s) has only one pole at s = 0, G(r) has a term (r + 1) in
the numerator. For instance, the r-transform of the function 1's is
(r+1)/2. When G(s) has two poles at s = 0, the corresponding G(r)
has the term (r + 1)(r− 1) in the numerator. For a function with
three poles at s = 0, the corresponding r-transform function has
r(r + 1)(r − 1) in the numerator. These facts suggest that when
making the partial fraction expansion of G(r)GG(r), the number
of poles that the function G₁(s)/s has at s = 0 must be investigated.
If G(s)/s has only one pole at s = 0, G₁(s) does not have any pole
at s = 0; the partial fraction expansion of Ge(r) GoG(r) is per-
formed, since the (r+ 1) term that is needed to correspond to
the poles of G₁(s)/s at s = 0 is already available at the right-hand
side of Eq. (8-21). However, if G(s)/s has two poles at s = 0,
Ge(r) GoG₁(r)/(r1) must be expanded, since the r-transform of
1/s² is Tr 1)(r+1)/4.
-
(5) Once Ge(s) G1(s) is determined from Eq. (8-21), Ge(s) is
readily obtained. However, because of the lack of correspondence
between the number of s-plane zeros and the r-plane zeros, the func
tion G.(s) obtained from the previous steps will in many cases have,

Sec. 8.3
257
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
TABLE 8-1
Laplace
transform
G(s)
z-transform
G(z)
1/5
2
Z
r-transform
G(r)
r+ 1
12
1135
113
Tz
(z − 1)2
T2x(x + 1)
2(x-1)3
1
s+ a
Z
2-e-ar
1
a) 2
s + a
T(r + 1)(r − 1)
4
T²r(r + 1)(r − 1)
8
r+1
(1 − e−ar) (r
r+
-
1+ e-ar
1- e-ar
(r + 1)(r − 1)Te-ar
Tze-ar
(z — e-ar) 2
(1 − e−ar
- e-ar) 2 r +
+e-ar
e-ar
a
s(s + a)
a
(1 - e-ar)z
(z − 1)(z — e-ar)
s² (s + a)
Tz
(≈ − 1)²
w
s² + w²
w
(s + a) w2
(1 - e-ar)
a(z − 1)(z − e−aT)
-
z sin wT
22-2z cos wT+1
ze-ar sin wT
22-2ze-ar cos T + e 2aT
(r + 1)(r− 1)
2(r+
1 + e-ar
e-ar
T(r+ 1)(r− 1)
4
(r + 1)(r− 1)
1+e-ar
2ar +
e-aT
(r + 1)(r − 1) sin wT
2[(r² + 1) − (r² − 1) cos wT]
-
(r+ 1)(r− 1) e-ar sin wT
(r + 1)² − 2(r + 1)(r − 1).
e-ar cos wT+ (r − 1)e-2ar
more zeros than poles. This can be circumvented by adding one or
more remote poles to Ge(s) on the negative real axis in the s-plane.
These additional poles will have negligible effect on the over-all
system response.
A numerical example is given in the following to illustrate the
presented method of design.
Example 8-2
Consider that the sampled-data system shown in Fig. 8-8 has a sampling
period of one second and a transfer function for the controlled system
1
G₁(s)
-
s(s + 1)(s + 2)
The system is without compensation at the moment.
The z-transform of the zero-order hold and G₁(s) is
(8-22)

258
Chap. 8
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
GhoG₁(z) = (1
-
1
¹) 3 [ 5² (5 + 1) (s + 2)
0.33x²+0.692 + 0.078
0.25
(8-23)
(≈ − 1)(≈ — 0.368)(z — - 0.135)
The corresponding r-transform function is then.
Gho G₁(r) = 0.25
(r− 1)(r + 0.784) (r− 0.326)
(r + 2.16) (r + 1.31)
(8-24)
The Bode plot for GhoG(r) is shown in Fig. 8-10. The magnitude in db
and phase of GhoG₁(r) are transferred from the Bode plot to the Nichols chart
80
60
40
201
Gain crossover
db o
-20
-40
-600
-80
O.I
ليل
Magnitude curve GoG₁|
(uncompensated system)`
New gain
crossover
Magnitude curve Ge GroG₁||
(compensated system)
0.326
1.0
0.784
3 6 10
2.16
ωρ
60 100
107
1,000
360°
270°
Phase
margin 22°
180°
Phase
margin 45°
Phase shift
(uncompensated system)
90°
0°
Phase shift
(compensated system)
-90°
-180°
O.I
10
ωρ
100
1,000
Fig. 8-10 Bode diagram of the uncompensated and the com-
pensated system of Example 8-2.

Sec. 8.3
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION 259
32

28
M = 1.15-
-M = 2.0
24
M = 1.3
20
M=1.6
M = 2.5
-M = 4.0
16
12
8
4
db
O
2.8
の
​10
10
@
8
-4 Uncompensated
3
-8
system
GhoG₁(jwr)
1.8
2.8
-12
1.8
Compensated system
Geljw, GhoG₁(jw)
1.2
-16
ա.
-20
1.2
O
-24
-28
-32
260° 240° 220° 200° 180° 160°
140° 120° 100° 90°
Phase shift
Fig. 8-11 Nichols chart for the system in Example 8-2.
as shown in Fig. 8-11. From this Nichols chart the following quantities on
the performance of the system are measured:
Peak resonance
Phase margin
Gain margin
Mp
= 4
Ф. М.
=
22 deg.
G. M.
=
3 db
Clearly the uncompensated system has a rather poor margin of stability.
Let us now assume that the desired phase margin of the system is to be
greater than or equal to 45 deg, and M, 1.5. The steady-state accuracy of the
system should be maintained at the original level. In other words, the velocity
error constant K, must not be affected by the compensation. By referring to
the relationship between s and r as shown in Fig. 7-8, we can see that in
order to preserve the zero frequency behavior of the open-loop transfer func-
tion, the function Ge(r)GoG, (r) must equal GoG(r) in magnitude as rap-
proaches infinity, since as s→0, r∞. Therefore, the magnitude curve of
GhoG (r) shown in the Bode plot of Fig. 8-10 must not be affected by the
compensating network at w, ∞, or the constant K, requirement would
simply imply that
lim Ge(r)
= 1
(8-25)
748

250 DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
Chap. 8
Inspection of Fig. 8-10 reveals that a phase margin of 45 deg may be
realized if the gain crossover frequency (@) is shifted from the present value
3) 10 0, 5. Since the high frequency (.) gain of GG: (7) must be
kept unchanged, a phase-lag model for Gr) would definitely shift the gain
crossover toward a lower frequency, thus further degenerating the stability of
the system. Therefore, a phase-lead model is more appropriate for G!(r). Let
(a > 1)
11 - atr
Ge(r) =
(8-26)
The Bode plot of G(r) is depicted in Fig. 8-12 in magnitude and phase
versus o,. The objective of the phase-lead model is to provide ample attenua-
tion to GG (jo,) near the gain crossover while not affecting the high frequ-
ency behavior, and the effect on the phase shift curve is to be kept at a
minimum. Since the phase shift of the phase-lead compensator when added
to the original phase shift curve would have an effect of reducing the phase
margin of the system, a safety factor should be included when selecting the
new gain crossover. Therefore, instead of using @, = 5, let us select = 6
as the new gain crossover of the compensated system. As Fig. 8-10 shows,
the magnitude of GG, (jo,) at 6 is equal to 5 db. This suggests that
the phase-lead compensator must provide 5 db of attenuation at this frequency
. Therefore,
20 log 10 a = 5 db
Solving for a from the last equation yields a = 1.78.
(8-27)
Having determined the value of a, only the selection of a proper value
for T is necessary to complete the design. Referring to the phase shift curve
of the lead network shown in Fig. 8-12, we see that if the lower corner
(1/ar) of the network is placed far above the new gain crossover = 6, the
phase shift of GG(jw) will not be appreciably affected by the compensation.
16' (jw)
db
90°
[G(jw)
O
20 log10
1/0T
1/T
0-1
sin m =
0+1
Φ
Fig. 8-12 Bode plot of the phase-lead model for G(r)
11+ arr
altor
Wr

Sec. 8.3
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION 261
Usually, the lower corner 1/ar of the compensator is placed at a frequency
(,) about one decade above w; that is,
1/αT
= 10w
= €60
Therefore, the compensating network is described by
(8-28)
1 1 + 0.0167r
Ge(r)
---
1.781 +0.0094r
(8-29)
The open-loop transfer function of the compensated system is now
Ge(r)GhoG₁(r)
=
-
0.25 (r − 1)(r + 0.784)(r − 0.326)(1 + 0.0167r)
1.78 (r + 2.16) (r + 1.31)(1 + 0.0094r)
(8-30)
The magnitude and phase shift of the compensated system function
Ge(r)GoG₁(r) are now plotted in the Bode plot and the Nichols chart in
Figs. 8-10 and 8-11, respectively. The peak resonance of the compensated
system is equal to 1.3, and the phase margin is approximately 45 degrees.
Consequently, the system as compensated is considered satisfactory.
The corresponding Laplace transform of the compensating network is.
determined as follows:
Since G(s)/s has two poles at s = 0, in order to determine Ge(s), the
partial fraction expansion of the function G'(r)GhoG₁(r)/(r− 1) is to be
evaluated. Thus from Eq. (8–30)
Ge(r)GhoG, (r)
(r-1)
= 0.25 1
[1
2.2
r + 2.16
+
0.55
r + 1.31
48.4
r + 107
(8-31)
or
Ge(r)GoG₁(r) = 0.25(r
2.2
r + 2.16
Substitution of Eq. (8-32) into Eq. (8-21) yields
1) 1
-
+
0.55
r + 1.31
48.4
r + 107
(8-32)
3
Ge(s)G(s)
(r + 1)(r − 1)
--
= 0.25
S
2
| z = (r + 1)/(r− 1)
2.2
0.55
48.4
1
+
r + 2.16 r + 1.31 r + 107
(8-33)
The corresponding Laplace transform of each of the terms on the right-hand
side of Eq. (8-33) is found from Table 8-1. Therefore,
or
Ge(s)G,(s)
S
0.5
-
Ge(s)G,(s)
-
S
0.55
s(s + 1)
+
0.138
s(s + 2)
0.02 23s 36s2
-
12.1
-
5(5
(8-34)
(s + 0.02)
1253
(8-35)
s² (s + 1)(s + 2) (s + 0.02)
This leads to a compensation function
Ge(s)
=
0.02 - 23s 36s2 123
(s + 0.02)
(8-36)
In order for Ge(s) to be RC realizable, two remote poles must be added to
Ge(s), say at s =
-40 and s = -100. Thus
Go(s)
=
-
12s3
0.02 - 23s 36s2
(s +0.02)(s +40) (s + 100)
(8-37)

262 DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
Chap. 8
The realization of the compensating network, whose transfer function is
given by Eq. (8-37), can be carried out by any standard method of synthesis
of RC two ports described in the literature of network synthesis.†
Note that the bilinear transformation z = (1 + w)/(1 - w) can
also be used for the proposed method of design of sampled-data
control systems with continuous-data compensation. Whereas there
is no distinct advantage in using either the r or the w transforma-
tion, the latter is considered as an alternative design technique only.
Since for a fixed value of z, r and w are related by
r= 1/w
(8-38)
the method using the w-transformation can be regarded as a "dual"
of the r-transform method described above.
We can easily verify the statement that in order for the com-
pensating function Ge(s) to be RC realizable, G(w) must have only
simple poles that lie between the points 0 and -1 on the negative
real axis in the w-plane. The zeros of G'(w) can lie at any place in
the w-plane.
Similar to the r-transform method, the open-loop transfer function
of the uncompensated system after being w-transformed is
GroG₁(w) = {(1 − x¯¹) 3[G.($)]},
=
2w
w 31.
G₁(s)
z=(1+w)/(1-w)
1+ w = (1+w)/(1-w)
S
(8-39)
After compensation the w-transform of the open-loop system is
Ge(w) Gho G1(w)
=
Gho Gc G₁(w)
=
2w
w+1
from which we have
3[G.(s) G₁(s)]
S
=
} z = (1+w) / (1−w)
3[Ge(s) G₁(s)].
:=(1+w)/(1-w)
(8-40)
w + 1 [G: (w) G G₁ (w)] (8-41)
2w
The function Ge(s)G₁(s)/s is found from Eq. (8-41) by taking
the partial fraction expansion of the right-hand side of the equation
and then finding the corresponding pairs of functions in s. A table
of transforms relating s, z, and w for some common transfer func-
tions similar to those of Table 8-1 can be derived if necessary. As
can be easily shown, the following partial fraction expansions of
functions must be made corresponding to the number of poles of
G₁(s)/s at s = 0:
See for example, N. Balabanian, Network Synthesis (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.:
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1958), Chap. 7.

Sec. 8.3
263
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
G(s)/s has one pole at s = 0
expand G(w)GhoG₁(w)
G₁(s)/s has two poles at s = 0
expand
G₁(s)/s has three poles at s = 0 expand
Ge(w) Gho G1(w)
1-w
Ge(w) GhoG₁(w)
(1 − w)(1 + w)
The remaining steps of the design procedure follow in exactly
the same way as that described for the r-transform method.
80
60
40
Magnitude curve of GhoG, (w)
(uncompensated system)
20
Gain crossover
db O
Magnitude curve of
Gć (w) GnoG₁(w)
(compensated system)
New gain
-20
crossover
-40
1
-600
-80
0.0094
1 0.46
0.001
0.01
O.I
의
​0.0167
ww
0.2 0.33
1.0 3.05
0.76 1.27
10
0°
-90°
Phase shift
-180°
(compensated system)
Phase
margin 45°
-270°
-360°
0.001
0.01
Phase
margin 22°
Phase shift
(uncompensated system)
O.I
ww
1.0
Fig. 8-13 Bode diagram of the uncompensated and the com-
pensated systems of Example 8-2. (The w-transformation is
used).
10

264
Chap. 8
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
As an illustration, the design problem given in Example 8-2 is
reworked using the w-transformation. Substituting z
into Eq. (8-23) yields
Go G₁(w)
= € 0.25
―
-
=
(1+w)(1 − w)
(8-42)
(1 w)(1 + 0.784w) (10.326w)
w(1+2.16w)(1 + 1.31w)
The Bode plot for GhoGi(w) is shown in Fig. 8-13, and the plot
in the Nichols chart is clearly identical to that of Fig. 8-11. The
values of ww on the Nichols chart plot are obtained from the corres-
ponding or values through the relation
=
ωω
1/wr
(8-43)
As inspection of the Bode plot in Fig. 8-13 shows, a phase-lead
model for G(w) is not suitable for the compensation of the system,
since it would simply shift the gain crossover to a higher frequency
(ww) and thus reduce the phase margin still further. A phase-lag
model for G'(w) is more appropriate; that is,
Ge(w)
=
1 + ATW
1 + τω
(a <1)
(8-44)
The selection of the values of a and 7 simply follows the con-
ventional method of designing phase-lag compensation.†
The essence of phase-lag compensation is to move the gain cross-
over frequency to a lower frequency where the phase margin is as
specified. For the same specifications given in Example 8-2 and from
Fig. 8-13, we can see that a phase margin of 45 deg may be obtained
if the gain crossover is moved from ww
0.33 to ww 0.2 (these
values for wow correspond to w, 3.0 and w, 5, respectively).
In fact, if we substitute r = 1/w into Eq. (8-29) and simplify, we
have the satisfactory compensating model for G'(w). Therefore,
=
G(w)= [G(r)]r=1/w=
=
=
1 + 60w
1 + 107w
(8-45)
The Bode plot of the compensated system function G(w) G10G₁(w)
is now shown in Fig. 8-13. Without doubt, the two compensated
systems described by Figs. 8-11 and 8-13 are identical. Also, by use
of Eq. (8-45) and G(w) GoGi(w), the same transfer function for
Ge(s) is obtained as in Eq. (8-37).
—
Thus, the r-transform z = (r + 1)/(r − 1) and the w-transform
z = (1 + w)/(1 - w) may lead to the same (or similar) results for
Ge(s) in a given problem. Since the solution of Ge(s) for a given
design problem is not unique, independent use of the r and the w
† B. C. Kuo, Automatic Control Systems (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall,
Inc., 1962), Chap. 9.

Sec. 8.4
265
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
transform methods is unlikely to lead to identical results for Ge(s)
as illustrated above. But for a fixed set of design specifications, the
results obtained by the two methods should be equally valid.
As a summary to this section, some pertinent facts about the
continuous-data compensation of sampled-data systems using r or w
transformation are summarized as follows:
(1) The r-transform method.
(a) For RC realizability of G.(s), Ge(r) must have only simple
poles to the left of the -1 point on the real axis in the
r-plane. The zeros of G(r) can lie anywhere in the
r-plane.
(b) Usually, a phase-lead model for G(r) is more desirable.
(c) In order to determine G. (s), a specific function (1, 1/(r+1)
or 1/(r+1)(r-1)) must be multiplied to Ge(r) G10G(r)
corresponding to the number of poles of G₁(s)/s at s = 0
before the partial fraction expansion is taken.
(2) The w-transform method.
-
(a) For RC realizability of Ge(s), G'(w) must have only simple
poles that lie between 0 and 1 on the real axis in the
w-plane. The zeros of G(w) can lie anywhere in the
w-plane.
(b) Usually, a phase-lag model for G(w) is more desirable.
(c) In order to determine G.(s), a specific function (1,1/(1—w),
1/(1 − w)(1 + w)) must be multiplied to G'(w) GroG₁(w),
corresponding to the number of poles of G₁(s)/s _at_s = 0
before taking the partial fraction expansion.
8.4 FEEDBACK COMPENSATION WITH CONTINUOUS-
DATA NETWORKS
Compensating networks for sampled-data control systems can also
be introduced into feedback paths. In general, the compensators may
be of the continuous-data or the digital-data types. However, only
feedback compensation with continuous-data networks will be con-
sidered in this chapter.
Two simple forms of feedback-compensated systems with sampled-
data are depicted in Fig. 8-14. In more complex situations of course
compensations may be introduced in the forward path as well as the
feedback paths.
As can be shown, the two feedback-compensated systems with
continuous-data networks in Fig. 8-14 may be represented by equi-
valent sampled-data systems with digital compensators located in the

266 DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
Chap. 8
forward paths only. Therefore, designing the feedback compensations
with continuous-data networks is essentially equivalent to finding the
cascade-digital-compensators in the equivalent systems.
Let us consider the system shown in Fig. 8-14a. The z-transform
of the output response is given by
GroG₁(z)
C(z) =
R(z)
1+GH(z) + GrG₁(2)
(8-46)
Multiplying the numerator and the denominator of Eq. (8-46) by a
function G.(z) yields
C(z) =
Gho G1(z) Ge(z)
Ge(2) + Ge(2)G₁H(z) + Ge(z) GmG1(z)
R(z) (8-47)
Now consider the sampled-data system with cascade digital compen-
sation shown in Fig. 8-15. The z-transform of the system output is
given by
C(z) =
Ge(z) Gho G1(2)
R(z)
1 + Ge(z) Go G₁ (2)
(8-48)
If the systems of Figs. 8-14a and 8-15 were to be equivalent, we
would equate Eq. (8-47) to Eq. (8-48). After simplification we have
R(s)
R(s)
H(s)
(a)
H(s)
Gno(s)
G₁(s)
-C(s)
Gno(s)
G₁(s)
-C(s)
(b)
Fig. 8-14 Sampled-data control systems with feedback compen-
sation (continuous-data networks).

Sec. 8.4
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION 267
R(s)
Gc(s)
Gho(s)
Digital
compensator
G₁(s)
C(s)
Fig. 8-15 Sampled-data system with cascade digital compensation.
Ge(z) + Ge(z) GoH(z) = 1
Solving for GoH(z) in the last equation, we have
Go H(z)
-
1- Ge(z)
Ge(z)
(8-49)
(8-50)
Taking into account the transfer function of the zero-order hold,
Eq. (8-50) leads to
3[H(s)]
=
1
-
z¹
1 - Ge(z)
Ge(z)
(8-51)
The inverse transform (z to s) of Eq. (8-51) gives the transfer
function H(s) of the feedback compensating network, implying that
once Ge(s) is determined for the system in Fig. 8-15, the function
H(s) of the feedback compensated system in Fig. 8-14a is obtained
by use of Eq. (8-51).
However, there is still the physical realizability of H(s) to be
considered. In other words, what are the restrictions on Ge(z) so
that H(s) is always a physically realizable transfer function?
Evidently, the realizability of H(s) (and of H(s)/s) relies entirely
upon the physical realizability of the z-transform of H(s)/s, and vice
versa. For a transfer function to be realizable physically, the system
represented by the transfer function must not produce an output
prior to the application of an input. This statement is true for
continuous-data as well as sampled-data systems. For the output to
occur at or after the application of an input, the series expansion
of 3[H(s)/s] should have no posititive powers in z. Since 3[H(s)/s]
can usually be expressed in terms of the ratio of a power series in
z¹, the requirement for physical realizability is met with the follow-
ing form:
72
- k
Akz
3 [H(s)]
k=0
m
bkz-k
k=0
(8-52)
where bo 0. Substituting Eq. (8-52) into Eq. (8-51) and solving
for G.(z), we have

268
Chap. 8
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
Gc(z)
=
m
m
Σ bxz-k
k=0
n
¯
Σ bx * + (1 - 2) Σ arz *
k=0
M
Σ bxz-k
k=0
k=0
k=0
Ckz-k
(8-53)
where bo 0.
Therefore, the physical realizability condition of H(s) requires
that G.(z) be of the form of Eq. (8-53) with b。 0.
If H(s) is to be a realizable RC transfer function, then all the
poles of H(s) must be simple and must lie on the negative real axis of
the s-plane, excluding the origin and infinity. The zeros of H(s) can
lie at any place in the s-plane. Therefore, H(s)/s can be expanded
into the following form by partial fraction expansion:
H(s)
=
S
A。
m
+ Σ
Ak
S k=1 S + Sk
(8-54)
where A, and A are constants and where sk (k = 1, 2, 3, . . ., m)
are simple negative poles. The z-transform of H(s)/s is therefore
3[H(s)]
m
=
Ao
1
+
—
Ak
SKT
-
e
(8-55)
which has simple poles inside the unit circle with only one pole at
2 =
ཇ.
In order to expand 3[H(s)/s] into the form of Eq. (8–55), Ge(z)
must have an equal number of zeros and poles as Eq. (8-51) implies.
Furthermore, comparing Eqs. (8-52) and (8-53), we see that the
poles of [H(s)/s] are generated from the zeros of G.(z). Therefore,
the RC realizability of H(s) requires in addition that G.(z) be of
the form of Eq. (8-53); G.(2) must have an equal number of zeros and
poles; and the zeros of G.(z) must be simple and lie inside the unit
circle in the z-plane. There are no restrictions on the location of the
poles of G.(z), and therefore, an RC transfer function for H(s) can
be derived from even an unstable G.(z) that satisfies all the above
mentioned requirements but has a pole or poles outside the unit
circle.
To illustrate the realization of a digital compensator by the
continuous-data feedback compensator of Fig. 8-14a, the following
example is given.
Example 8-3
A digital compensator with transfer function G.(z) given below is shown

Sec. 8.4
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION 269
in Fig. 8-16a. Determine the transfer function H(s) of the equivalent continuous-
data feedback structure in Fig. 8-16b.
G.(z) = (1 — 0.5x-1) (1 − 0.8≈1)
(1 − 0.2z¯¹)(1 − 0.1≈¯¹)
−
(8-56)
Since G.(z) has an equal number of poles and zeros and since all the zeros
are simple and lie inside the unit circle |z|= 1, H(s) can be realized by an
RC network.
Substituting Eq. (8-56) into Eq. (8-51) and simplifying, we get
3√ H(s)
S
Expanding by partial fraction expansion, Eq. (8-57) becomes
-z-1+0.382-2
=
(1
1x ≈¯¹)(1 − 0.2z¯¹)(1 − 0.1z¯¹)
=
H(s) -0.86
2.25
S
1
2-1
1 — 0.2x-1
+
1
-
3.11
0.12-1
(8-57)
(8-58)
The pairs of transforms corresponding to the right-hand side of the last equa-
tion are found from the z-transform table. Thus
H(s)
-0.86
=
S
S
from which
H(s)
= -
2.25
+
3.11
s + 1.61 s + 2.3
3.53s+3.18
(s + 1.61)(s + 2.3)
(8-59)
(8-60)
The negative sign for H(s) means that positive feedback should be used in
the system in Fig. 8-16b.
The sampled-data system with feedback compensation given in Fig. 8-14b.
can also be approximated by the cascade-digital compensation configuration of
Fig. 8-15. Evidently, for the two systems in Figs. 8-14b and 8-15 to be equiv-
alent, the following relationship must be true:
پک
Gc(s)
·Gc(z)·
(a)
H(s)
(b)
Gno(s)
Fig. 8-16 Digital compensator and equivalent feedback compe-
sator with continuous-data network.

270
Chap. 8
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION
H(s)G₁(s)
1
] =
1- G.(z)
S
--
G.(z)
(8-61)
Since the left-side of Eq. (8-61) contains G₁(s) as well as H(s), the re-
quirements on G,(z) for an RC realizable H(s) are necessarily more complicated
than those listed in the previous case. However, for 3[H(s)G,(s)/s] to be
physically realizable, G.(z) must have an equal number of poles and zeros.
Also, the simple poles of H(s) in the left-half of the s-plane must be generated
by the simple zeros of G.(z) inside the unit circle | z |= 1. In addition to
these restrictions, Ge(z) must contain additional zeros that correspond to the
poles of G₁(s).
Usually, the function H(s) obtained from Eq. (8-61) may contain more
zeros than poles, but remote poles may be added to make H(s) RC realizable.
Example 8-4
Consider that the controlled process of the sampled-data control system in
Fig. 8-15 has the transfer function
G₁(s)
=
1
s(s+ 0.694)
(8-62)
The sampling time is one second. The system is considered to be satisfactorily
compensated by a cascade-digital compensator (Fig. 8-15) with transfer function
--
-
Gc(z) =
(1 − ¯¹)(1 − 0.52-1) (10.22-¹)
(10.12-1)
Note that G.(z) contains zeros at z =
(8-63)
1 and z = 0.5 which correspond to the
poles of G₁(s) at s = 0 and s = -0.694, respectively. We assume that the
design of the digital compensation is flexible enough so that the inclusion of
these two zeros in G.(z) is permissible.
Substituting Eq. (8-63) into Eq. (8-61) and simplifying yields
H(s)G₁(s)
=
S
1.62-1 -0.82-2 + 0.12-3
1 — ≈¯¹)²(1 − 0.2≈¯¹)(1 − 0.5≈-¹)
Expansion of Eq. (8-64) by partial fraction expansion yields
H(s)G₁(s) 2.252-1
(8-64)
=
S
(1 − ≈¯¹)²
―
1.31
1 -
0.02
1.33
+
2-1
1 -0.2x-1 1- 0.52-1
(8-65)
The pairs of Laplace transforms corresponding to the right-hand side of the
last equation are found from the z-transform table. Thus
H(s)G,(s) 2.25
1.31
=
2
S
S
=
0.02
+
1.33
s+ 1.61 S+ 0.694
1.38s2 + 4.7s+ 2.5
s2(s+0.694) (s + 1.61)
Solving for H(s) from Eq. (8-66), we have
(8-66)
H(s)
1.38(s+2.74) (s + 0.66)
-
(s + 1.61)
In order that H(s) is RC realizable, a remote pole at say s =
added to H(s). Therefore,
(8-67)
50, must be

Sec. 8.4
DESIGN AND COMPENSATION 271
H(s)
=
1.38(s + 2.74)(s + 0.66)
(s+1.61)(s+ 50)
(8-68)
This section has outlined methods for using feedback compensa-
tion of sampled-data systems with continuous-data networks. In
designing the feedback compensating network, an equivalent cascade-
digital compensation model may be used. Since the transfer function
of the digital compensator G.(z) is isolated from the transfer func-
tion of the controlled process Gi(z) (see Eq. (8-48)), various con-
ventional design techniques such as the root locus and the Bode
diagram methods can be used immediately, without approximation
in designing G.(z). However, detailed discussions and illustrations of
the design of digital compensations will be given in the next chapter.
Note that the feedback structure depicted in Fig. 8-16 may also
serve as a realization of a digital compensator utilizing RC networks.
REFERENCES
Brown, R. G., and Murphy, G. J., "An Approximate Transfer Function for
the Analysis and Design of Pulsed Servo," Trans. A. I. E. E., 71, 1952, pp.
435-440.
Johnson, G. W., Lindorff, D. P., and Nordling, C. G. A., "Extension of Con-
tinuous-Data System Design Techniques to Sampled-Data Control Systems,"
Trans. A. I. E. E., Part 2, September 1955, pp. 252-263.
Katt, D. R., "Conditional Feedback Systems Applied to Stabilizing a Missile
in Pitch Attitude," WESCON Convention Record, 1957, pp. 171–175.
Lago, G. V., and Truxal, J. G., "The Design of Sampled-Data Feedback
Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 73, Part 2, November 1954, pp. 247-253.
Lang, G., and Ham, J. M., "Conditional Feedback Systems-A New Approach
to Feedback Control," Trans. A. I. E. E., Part 2, 74, 1955, 152-161.
Linvill, W. K., "Sampled-Data Control Systems Studied Through Comparison
of Sampling with Amplitude Modulation," Trans. A. I. E. E., 70, Part 2,
1951, 1779-1788.
Linvill, W. K., and Sittler, R. W., "Extension of Conventional Techniques
to the Design of Sampled-Data Systems," I. R. E., Convention Record, Part 1,
1953, pp. 99-104.
Pastel, M. P., and Thaler, G. J., "Sampled-Data Design by Log Gain Dia-
grams," I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-4, No. 2, November
1959, pp. 192–197.
Schmidt, S. F., "Application of Continuous System Design Concepts to the
Design of Sampled-Data Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., Part 2, May 1959, pp.
74-79.

9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL
CONTROLLERS
9.1 INTRODUCTION
In the preceding chapter, compensation of sampled-data control
systems is accomplished by the insertion of continuous-data networks
in the forward or the feedback paths of the systems. Since the
continuous-data network is connected directly to the controlled
process, the z-transform of the product of the two transfer functions
is a single function. Therefore, analytically it is difficult to evaluate
the effects of various continuous networks on the over-all performance
of the system. Usually, in order to reduce the design effort, approxi-
mation methods such as the time-delay approximation described in
the last chapter have to be used. A design method using the bilinear
r-transformation or the w-transformation was introduced. The method
has the advantage of giving exact solutions without using approxi-
mations.
Alternately, compensation of a sampled-data system can also be
accomplished by introducing pulsed-data networks, or digital control-
lers into the system. The process, therefore, is referred to as the
digital compensation of sampled-data systems.
Although continuous-data networks are simple to implement and
economical to build, the digital controller is in general more versatile,
and thus better system performance can be achieved by means of
digital compensation. Furthermore, digital compensation may be
272

Sec. 9.1
273
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
R(s)
R(s)
R(s)
E(s)
D(s)
Gro(s)
G₁(s)
C(s)
to
D*(s)
Zero-order Controlled
hold
process
Digital controller
(a)
D(s)
Digital controller
Gro(s)
(b)
G₁(s)
Controlled
process
C(s)
C(s)
G₁(s)
H(s)
Gho(s)
D(s)
(c)
Fig. 9-1 Control systems with digital compensations. (a) Cascade-
digital compensation. (b) Bypass digital compensation. (c) Feed-
back digital compensation.
applied to continuous-data systems as well as sampled-data systems.
Several possible configurations of the digital compensation of
sampled-data and continuous-data control systems are depicted in
Fig. 9-1.
Figure 9-1a shows that a digital controller is introduced in the
forward path of a feedback control system. The system could be
considered as a sampled-data system or a continuous-data system
with digital compensation. If the uncompensated system is a sampled-
data system, D(s) and the sampler following D(s) represent the
digital compensator unit. If the uncompensated system is considered
a continuous-data system, D(s), the two synchronized switches and
the zero-order hold Go(s) represent the digital compensator unit.

274 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
The system shown in Fig. 9-1b can be considered as a continuous-
data system with bypass digital compensation. The actuating signal
E(s) to the controlled process is equal to the sum of the continuous
error E(s) and the sampled error E2(s). Figure 9-1c illustrates the
insertion of a digital controller in the feedback path of a continuous-
data system.
The conventional design techniques utilizing such tools as the
Nyquist plot, the Bode diagram, and the root locus plot, can be
applied readily to the design of digital compensation. Let us investigate
the sampled-data system shown in Fig. 9-1a. The closed-loop
z-transfer function of the system is written
C(z) D(z) GhoG₁(2)
=
10
R(z) 1+D(2)GoG1 (2)
(9-1)
In Eq. (9-1) since D(z)GoG₁(z) is the product of the pulse transfer
function D(z) of the digital controller and the z-transform of
GhoGI(s), the variation of D(z) can be controlled independently.
Therefore, in terms of the frequency loci, the reshaping of the locus
of GhoGi(z) by use of various forms of D(z) can be studied in a
straightforward manner, and the selection of the desired D(z) is
easily accomplished.
Likewise, selection of the desired D(z) can be effected by observ-
ing the effect of the adjustment and variation of the poles and
zeros of D(z) upon the root locus of the characteristic equation.
Under certain circumstances, zeros may be introduced to D(z) to
cancel the unwanted poles of GOG(2), and new poles of D(z) are
added at appropriate places to improve the system performance.
The first part of this chapter is devoted to the use of con-
ventional techniques for the design of digital compensation of feed-
back control systems with an emphasis on the Bode plot and the
root locus methods.
9.2 THE DIGITAL CONTROLLER
Before entering into the design of digital compensation, we shall
discuss the construction and the realizability of the digital controller,
the fundamental ingredient of a control system with digital compen-
sation. The block diagram of a digital controller is shown in Fig.
9-2.
With reference to Fig. 9-2, the transfer function of the digital
controller is defined as
E2(z)
D(z) =
E,(z)
(9-2)

Sec. 9.2
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 275
X.
e,(t) e*(1)
E₁(s)
e2(1)
e (1)
D(s)
TE*(s)
E₂(s)
E₂(s)
D(z)
Digital controller
Fig. 9-2 The block diagram of a digital controller.
The input e(t) to the digital controller is in the form of discrete
samples of e(t). The digital controller performs certain linear
operations on the input samples and delivers a modified pulse sequence
e (t) to the output.
There are many ways of implementing a digital controller. A
digital controller may contain a passive network preceded and
followed by samplers. The digital controller may also be a special-
purpose digital computer or a general-purpose computer. This ap-
proach enables one to realize certain functional operations that are
not obtainable with passive elements.
The a priori requirement in the design of the digital controller
D(z) is that it be physically realizable. The effort would be worth-
less if the design results in a transfer function for D(z) which
cannot be realized by physical elements, passive or active.
The condition of physical realizability of any system implies that
no output signal of the system will appear before an input signal
is applied. If the transfer function D(z) of the digital controller is
expressed as a ratio of two polynomials in z
D(z) =
Anz" + An-12″-1 +
bmz+bm-12m-1 +
+ ao
+ bo
(9-3)
Expanding D(z) in a power series in z', the coefficients of the
series represent the values of the weighting sequence of the digital
controller. The coefficient of the z* term corresponds to the value
of the weighting sequence at t = kT, where k is an integer. Clearly,
for the digital controller to be physically realizable, the power
series expansion of D(z) must not contain any positive power in
z. Any positive power in z in the series expansion of D(z) simply
indicates "prediction" or simply that the output signal precedes
the input signal. Therefore, for D(z) to be physically realizable,
the highest power of the denominator must be equal to or greater
than that of the numerator in Eq. (9-3), or simply mn.
Quite often D(2) has equal number of poles and zeros and is
written as
D(z)
=
-1
ao + a₁z +
b。 + b₁z¹ +
-1
.
+ anz
+bmz¹
n
(9-4)

276 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
where n and m are any positive integers. In this case, the denomi-
nator must not contain any factor of z'. Therefore, the condition
for D(z) to be realizable is that bo 0 in Eq. (9-4).
The realization of the transfer function D(z) of a digital con-
troller by physical networks or devices is quite flexible and may take
many forms. The most common measures are the realization by
pulsed-data RC networks and digital computers.
1. Realization of D(z) by Pulsed-data RC Networks
The use of a pulsed-data RC network to realize the transfer
function D(z) of a digital controller follows directly from the
discussion given in Sec. 8-4. As was shown in Sec. 8-4, the design
of a feedback compensation with continuous-data networks can be
carried out in an equivalent system with series digital compensation.
In essence, the two systems shown in Fig. 8-16 are equivalent to
each other if the transfer functions are related by
1
D(z)
=
1+ GOH(2)
(9-5)
The problem in this section of course involves the determination of
H(s), the transfer function of the feedback pulsed-data network,
once D(z) is given.
A digital controller can also be realized with a series pulsed-data
network consisting of a zero-order hold and an RC network preceded
and followed by a sampler. In more complicated situations a com-
bination of the series and the feedback pulsed-data configurations
may lead to the realization of more complex digital controllers.
These three possibilities of realizing a digital controller are identified
and discussed below as the series pulsed-data networks, the feedback
pulsed-data networks, and the series-feedback pulsed-data networks.
Series Pulsed-data Networks. The series pulsed-data network which
is used for the realization of the pulse transfer function of a digital
controller is depicted in Fig. 9-3. The transfer functions of the two
systems in Fig. 9-3 are related by
D(z) = GoGc (z)
(9-6)
Since the transfer function of the zero-order hold is (1 e-T)/s, we
obtained from Eq. (9-6)
-
3 [G. (s)]
1
=
D(z)
-
z
(9-7)
J. Sklansky, "Pulsed RC Networks for Sampled-data Systems," I. R. E., Convention
Record, Part 2, 1956, pp. 81-99.

Sec. 9.2
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 277
Thus, given a specific D(z), the transfer function G.(s) of the
pulse-data network can be determined from Eq. (9-7) by taking
the inverse (z to s) transform.
If Ge(s) is to be an RC realizable transfer function, all the poles
of Ge(s) must be simple and lie on the negative real axis of the
s-plane with the exception of the origin and infinity. The zeros of
Gc(s) can be located anywhere in the s-plane. Therefore, Ge(s)/s
can be expanded into the following form by partial fraction expan-
sion:
Ge(s)
S
A。
= +
m
Ak
S (=1 S + Sk
=
1, 2, 3,
where A. and Ak are constants and s½ (k
simple negative real poles. The z-transform of Eq. (9-3) is
Ge(s)
-
S
A.
1
772
+
-
Ak
1
(9-8)
m) are
(9-9)
which has simple positive real poles inside the unit circle |z|= 1,
with only one pole at z = 1. Comparing Eq. (9-9) with Eq. (9-7),
we see that in order for G.(s) to represent an RC network, the pulse
transfer function D(2) must have the following properties:
(i) The number of poles of D(z) must be equal to or greater
than the number of zeros of D(z).
(ii) The zeros of D(z) are arbitrary in location.
(iii) The poles of D(z) must be simple, real and positive, and
lie inside the unit circle || 1 in the z-plane.
=
As an illustration, an example is presented below.
e(1)
e*(1)
e₂(1)
e (1)
D(s)
Gro(s)
Zero-order
hold
·D(z)·
(a)
e,(t)
e (1)
Gho(s)
Gc(s)
e2(1) e₂(1)
Gno(s)
T
Zero-order Passive
Zero-order
hold
hold
network
·D(z).
(b)
Fig. 9-3 Realization of pulse transfer function of the digital con-
troller by a series pulse-data network. (a) Digital controller. (b)
Equivalent series pulse-data network.

278 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
(21
Example 9-1
Given the pulse transfer function of a digital controller
D(z)
=
1- 0.52-1
1.- 0.2z-¹
て
​2 (9-10)
The problem is to realize D(z) by the series pulsed-data network of Fig.
9-3b. Since D(z) meets the three requirements of RC realizability listed
above, it can be realized by the series pulse-data network. Substitution of
Eq. (9-10) into Eq. (9-7) yields
(10.52-1)
(1 − ≈¯¹) (1 − 0.2x-¹)
Expanding the last equation into partial fractions, we have
3 [G₁(s)] = (1
g[2]=
-
0.625
1 2
0.375
+
1 -0.2z-1
(9-11)
(9-12)
The corresponding Laplace transforms of the right side of Eq. (9-12) are
found from the z-transform table. Thus
and
Ge(s)
S
=
0.625
+
S
0.375
s + 1.61
S+ 1
=
s(s + 1.61)
Ge(s)
=
s+1
S+ 1.61
(9-13)
(9-14)
An RC network realizing Ge(s) is shown in Fig. 9-4a, and the pulse-data
network for the realization of D(z) is given in Fig. 9-4b.
(b) Feedback Pulse-data Networks. As was shown in Sec. 8-4, the
feedback structure with zero-order hold and the RC network shown
in Fig. 9-5b is equivalent to the digital controller of Fig. 9-5a. The
R₁ = 102
R2=1.64-105
C=10μf
(a)
e,(t)
e (1)
Gno(s)
Ge(s) (1) A
e (1)
Zero-order
hold
RC network
D(z)
(b)
Fig. 9-4 Pulse-data network realization of D(z)
RC network realizing Ge(s).
1
0.52-1
=
1
0.2x-1 (a)

Sec. 9.2
279
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
e,(t)
D(s)
Gno(s)
e2(1)
Zero-order
hold
-D(z).
(a)
e,(t)
Gno(s)
e2(t)
Zero-order
hold
H(s)
RC network
(b)
Fig. 9-5 Realization of pulse transfer function of the digital con-
troller by a feedback pulse-data network. (a) Digital controller.
(b) Equivalent feedback pulse-data network.
transfer functions of the two systems are related by
or
=
1
1+ Gho H(z)
D(z)
3[H(s)]=
1
-1
-
Z
[1, D (2)
D(z)
1
1-
(9-15)
(9-16)
In order to realize H(s) by an RC network, the pulse transfer
function D(z) must have the following properties:
(i) D(z) must have the same number of poles and zeros.
(ii) The poles of D(z) are arbitrary.
(iii) The zeros of D(z) must be simple, real, positive, and lie
inside the unit circle of the z-plane.
The justifications to these restrictions have been discussed in
detail in Sec. 8.4 and therefore are not repeated here.
Note that in the feedback structure, restrictions are placed on
the location of the zeros rather than on the poles of D(z). In fact,
H(s) is RC realizable even if D(z) has poles outside the unit circle.
This characteristic of the feedback structure is not unexpected since
it is well known that any feedback system, even one with only
passive elements, may be stable or unstable under various operating
conditions.
An example illustrating the realization of a pulse-tranfer function
by the feedback pulse-data network is given in Example 8-3.
(c) Series-feedback Pulse-data Networks. Both the series network
and the feedback pulse-data network discussed above contain re-
strictions in the realization of pulse transfer functions. In the series
structure the zeros of D(z) are arbitrary, whereas in the feedback

280 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
structure the poles of D(z) are arbitrary. This implies that certain
combinations of the series and the feedback configurations may
relieve all the restrictions on the poles and zeros D(z) with the
exception of course that D(z) must be physically realizable. Many
such combinations are conceivable, but let us consider the simple
feedback-series pulse-data network shown in Fig. 9-6. Sklansky has
e,(t)
D(s)
ez (1)
e,(1)
H(s)
·D(z)-
(a)
Gno(s)
Gc(s)
ez (1)
Zero-order
hold
RC network
T
RC network
(b)
Fig. 9-6 Realization of pulse transfer function of the digital con-
troller by a feedback-series pulse-data network. (a) Digital con-
troller. (b) Equivalent feedback-series pulse-data network.
shown that any physically realizable pulse transfer function may be
realized by the pulsed-data network shown in Fig. 9-6b, where H(s)
and Ge(s) represent RC networks.
The over-all z-transfer function of the feedback-series structure
is given by
E2
E₂ (2)
=
GoGe(z)
E₁ (2) 1+ GoH(2)
(9-17)
If the two systems in Fig. 9-6 are equivalent to each other, we have
E₂(z)
E.(2)
=
D(x)
=
Gho Ge(2)
1+GH(2)
(9-18)
If the pulse transfer function D(z) has complex conjugate poles and
zeros and poles and zeros that are on or outside the unit circle,
D(2) can be realized neither by the series structure nor by the feed-
back structure of the pulse-data network with RC elements. Under
this condition we can write D(z) as the product of two pulse
transfer functions D,(z) and D.(z); that is,
+ Sklansky, op. cit.

Sec. 9.2
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 281
<
where
and
pals complex allstate Roks.
D(z)
=
D,(z)
=
Ds(z) Ds(z)
1
1 + GhoH(z)
D.(z) GhoGc(z)
=
つ
​(9-19) 1
(9-20)
(9-21)
Dr(z) and D,(z) are identical to the transfer functions of the
feedback pulse-data network and the series pulse-data network in
Eq. (9-15) and (9-6), respectively. Therefore, D(z) must have all
the properties of a pulse transfer function that can be realized by
the feedback pulse-data network with RC elements. This means that
Dr(z) should contain all the poles of D(z) that are complex and
all the unstable poles. The zeros of D(z) must be simple, real, and
positive, and lie inside the unit circle. The number of poles and
zeros of D(z) must be equal. Similarly, D,(z) must satisfy all the
requirements in order to be realized by a series pulse-data network
with RC elements. Thus D.(z) should contain all the zeros of D(z)
that are complex or on or outside the unit circle. Since it is assumed
that D(z) is physically realizable and that D,(z) has an equal
number of poles and zeros, D、(z) certainly does not have more zeros
than poles.
To illustrate the formulations of D、(z) and D,(z) from a specific
pulse transfer function D(z), let us consider the realization of the
following pulse transfer fuction by a pulse-data network:
D(z) =
realizable zeros
-
7-8 7.
8
unrealizable zeros
- 1
(1 − 0.5≈¯¹)(1 − 0.6z¯¹)(1 − 0.8≈¯¹)(1 + 0.2≈¯¹)(1 − x¯¹ + z−²)
(1 − 0.2≈¯¹)(1 − 0.37≈¯¹)(1 − 0.9z¯¹)(1 − z¯¹)(1 − 0.52¯¹ + z¯²)
+
-
-
— realizable poles
2=0-2
7-0.37
z
unrealizable poles
1
(9-22)
where the zeros that are real, positive, and simple, and lie inside
the unit circle are referred to as the realizable zeros and the complex
or non-positive (including 2 = 0) or multiple-order or unstable
(including those on the unit circle) zeros are referred to as the
unrealizable zeros. Same references are made for the poles of D(z).
The pulse transfer functions D,(z) and D,(z) are formulated as
follows:
D₁(z) =
-
Ds (z) =
-
Realizable zeros of D(z)
Unrealizable poles of D(z)
(10.52)(1 − 0.621)(1 0.82-¹)
1
-
(1 − z ')(1 – 0.5z-' + z )
Unrealizable
zeros of D(z)
Realizable poles of D(z)
1
(1+0.221)(1 − 2¹ + 2-2)
-
(9-23)
ひ
​-
(1 − 0.2x¯¹)(1 − 0.37≈¯¹)(1 − 0.9≈¯¹)
(9-24)

282
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
D,(z) satisfies the conditions of realizability by a feedback pulse-
data network with RC elements, and D.(z) is realizable by a series
pulse-data network with RC elements. Cascading the two pulse-data
networks, we have the feedback-series structure shown in Fig. 9-6.
However, the example given above is fabricated in such a manner
that the pulse transfer functions D,(z) and D,(z) that are formulated
from D(z) by properly assigning the realizable and the unrealizable
poles and zeros of D(z) to the two functions are directly realizable
by the feedback and the series structure, respectively.
Careful inspection of the pulse transfer function given in Eq.
(9-22) reveals that D(z) and D,(z) may be directly realizable by
their corresponding pulse-data networks only if the following condi-
tions are met:
(i) The number of realizable poles of D(z) = the number of
unrealizable zeros of D(z).
(ii) The number of realizable zeros of D(z) = the number of
unrealizable poles of D(z).
As another illustrative example let us consider the following pulse
transfer function:
realizable
zero
+
-1
+
(9-25)
(1 − 0.52¯¹)(1 + 0.2≈¯¹)(1 − x¯¹ + x¯²)
unrealizable zeros
D(z)
=
(1 − 0.2z¯¹)(1
-
-
≈¯¹)(1 − 0.5≈¯¹ + z¯²)
K
realizable
→
pole
unrealizable poles
+
-1
Evidently, D(z) is physically realizable, although it represents an
unstable system. According to the rules given in this section, the
poles and zeros of D(z) are assigned to D,(z) and D.(z) as follows:
D₁(z) =
Realizable zeros of D(z)
Unrealizable poles of D(z)
=
1
-
D,(z) =
Unrealizable zeros of D(z)
Realizable poles of D(z)
=
z
(1 – 0.5z-1)
≈¯¹)(1 − 0.5x¯¹ + z¯²)
-1
(9-26)
(1 +0.2x-¹)(1 − ≈¯¹ + 2¯²)
(10.2x-1)
(9-27)
Since D,(z) of Eq. (9-26) has two zeros at z = 0 that must be
referred to as unrealizable zeros, it cannot be realized by a feedback
pulsed-data network. Similarly, the D.(z) in Eq. (9-27) has two
poles at = 0 and is not realizable by a feedback structure. This
difficulty apparently stems from the fact that D(z) has one realizable
zero and three unrealizable poles and one realizable pole but three
unrealizable zeros. Under this condition the numerator and the
denominator of D(z) must be multiplied by (1 az¹)(1 − bz¯¹),
where a and b are real numbers, 0 < a <1, 0 <b<1, and a b;
-
-

Sec. 9.2
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 283
also, a and b are not equal to any other pole and zero of D(z). Then,
D,(z) and D,(z) may now be written as
-
(1 − ≈¯¹)(1 − 0.52¯¹ + z¯²)
-
Ds(x)
(10.52)(1 − az¯¹)(1 − bz¯¹)
-
=
D,(z) =
-1
(1+0.22)(1 − ¯¹ + ≈2)
≈
(1 − 0.2z¯¹)(1 − az¯¹)(1 − bz¯¹)
-
(9-28)
(9-29)
Now we see that D,(z) can be realized by a feedback pulse-data
network and D,(z) can be realized by a series pulsed-data network.
The over-all pulse transfer function D(z) may then be realized by
the feedback-series structure of Fig. 9-6b.
2. Realization of D(z) by Digital Computers
The implementation of a pulse transfer function D(z) can be
accomplished with a general-purpose or a special-purpose digital
computer; the latter is sometimes also referred to as a pulsed-data
processing unit. Because of the advantages in computing speed,
storage capacity, and flexibility, the use of digital computers in
control systems has become increasingly important. Furthermore,
due to the discrete property of the signals in a digital controller,
the realization of a pulse transfer function by a digital computer
seems to be quite natural.
In general, a pulse transfer function D(z) can be realized through
a program of a general-purpose digital computer. The following
three methods of programming have been discussed in the literature,‡
direct programming, cascade programming, and parallel programming.
In the pulse-data processing unit method, a special-purpose digital
computer may be built which is capable of performing specific
arithmetic manipulations of multiplication, storage, addition, and
subtraction, etc. Digital and analog devices may also be combined
in a pulse-data processing unit. For instance, the storage operation
may be implemented with either analog or digital devices. If digital
elements are used, the stored samples could be retained in coded
forms on registers, magnetic tapes, or drums. If analog elements
are used, data could be stored in the form of some analog quantities
such as current, voltage, or mechanical displacement.
The above mentioned methods of implementing a pulse transfer
function are discussed in the following paragraphs.
↑ A. R. Bergen, J. R. Ragazzini, "Sampled-data Processing Techniques For Feedback
Control Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., Part 2, Nov. 1954, pp. 236-244.
‡ J. M. Salzer, "Frequency Analysis of Digital Computers Operating in Real Time,”
Proc. I. R. E., Vol. 42, No. 2, 1954, pp. 457-466.

284 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
(a) Direct Programming. A physically realizable pulse transfer
function D(z) of a digital controller may be expressed in the general
form
D(z) =
=
E2(z) a。 + a₁z¯¹ + a2z +
E₁(z) b。 + b₁z¹ + b₂z¯² +
1
-2
2
...
+ anz
-n
(9-30)
+bmz
-m
where b. 0, m and n are positive integers, and E,(z) and E₁(z)
represent the z-transforms of the output and the input signal of the
digital controller, respectively. Cross-multiplying in Eq. (9-30) and
taking the inverse z-transform yields
m
be‡ (t) + Z bɩe‡ (t − kT) = Ż axe† (t kT)
k=1
Solving for e(t) from the last equation yields
1
n
e*
et (t) = ↓ — axe† (t − kT) — — — bɩet (t − kT)
bo
k=0
m
1
bo
- Z
(9-31)
(9-32)
The present value of the output e* (t) depends on the present and
the past information of the input and also on the past information
of the input signal as well. To implement the digital computer
program, two basic mathematical operations are required. The first
operation is the data storage. Past samples on the output and the
input signal must be stored in order that they may be used in the
computation of the output sample e(t). The second operation
involves arithmetic manipulations including multiplication of the
stored output and the input samples by constants b b。_and_ax bɔ,
addition and subtraction of samples.
and
If we let
1
m
x*(t)
=
bΣaker (t- kT)
(9-33)
0 k=0
72
y* (t)
=
bok
12 bxe (t − kT)
-
(9-34)
Eq. (9-32) is written
e (t) = x*(t) − y*(t)
(9-35)
The block diagram representation of the direct digital programming
to obtain x*(t) from e*(t) is shown in Fig. 9-7a, and the direct
digital program for the implementation of the relationship between
e (t) and y*(t) is depicted in Fig. 9-7b. The rectangular blocks in
the figures indicate the time delays which represent the storage
operation. The weights, ao/bo, a₁/bo, . . ., am/bo, and b₁/bo, b₂/b。, . . .,
bn/bo, represent the weighting which are applied to the various input
and output samples. The total sampled output e* (t) is obtained by
subtracting y*(t) from x*(t). Thus, the block diagram of the digital
program which gives the realization of D(z) is shown in Fig. 9-7c.

Sec. 9.2
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 285
T
e (1)
e* (1-T)
Storage
T
Storage
T
e (1-2T)
e*(1-mT)
Storage
00
bo
(1)
(1)
(a)
1b3
b2
bo
bo
ez
(1)
Storage
T
Storage
Storage
Storage
e(1-T)
e(1-27)
T
T
T
(b)
Input
e₁ (1)
Program for x*(†)
ex(t)
Program for y*(†)
fy*(1)
am
bo
815
(c)
Fig. 9-7 Block diagram for direct digital programming of D(z).
(a) Direct digital programming for x*(t) of Eq. (9-33). (b)
Direct digital programming for y*(t) of Eq. (9–34).
(b) Cascade Programming. A complex pulse transfer function.
D(2) may be written as the product of a number of simple pulse
transfer functions each realizable by a simple digital program. The
digital programming of D(z) may then be represented by the series
of cascaded digital programs of the simple pulse transfer functions.
Writing Eq. (9-30) in factored form, we have
y*(1)

286
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
D(z) =
E₂(z)
E,(z)
=
m
ao II (1 + cxx¯¹)
k=1
72
b。 II (1 + dxx¯¹)
k=1
(9-36)
where c and d are the zeros and the poles of D(z), re-
spectively. For n>m, D(z) is written as the product of n simple
pulse transfer functions
D(x) = [] Dx(2)
k=1
(9-37)
where
Dx(x)
a。(1 + c₁z¯¹)
-
(k = 1)
(9-38)
b。(1 + diz¯¹)
Dx(x)
1+ Ck2-1
-
(k
= 2, 3,
m)
(9-39)
1 + dxz¹
1
and
Dx(z)
=
(k = m + 1,
n)
(9-40)
1 + dx z¯¹
e (1)
ez (1)
D(z)
(a)
e*(1)
D₁(z)
D₂(z)
Dz(z)
Da(z)
Dn(z)
e(1)
(b)
Storage
T
Input
Storage
T
Ск
Output
(c)
Fig. 9-8 Cascade programming of pulse transfer function. (a)
Digital programming. (b) Cascaded digital programming. (c)
Digital program of Dµ(z) = (1 + cµz−¹)/(1 + dxz−¹).
Thus the digital program of D(z) shown in Fig. 9-8a can be
represented by the series connection of n simple digital programs
as shown in Fig. 9-8b. The schematic diagram of the digital program
of Dx(z), (k = 2, 3, . . ., m), is illustrated in Fig. 9-8c.
Parallel Programming. As an alternative method to cascade pro-
gramming, a pulse transfer function may be realized by the parallel

Sec. 9.2
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 287
combination of a number of simple digital programs. This type of
programming involves taking the partial fraction expansion of D(z).
Thus Eq. (9-30) is written.
D(z)
=
ก
1
-
Ak
(9-41)
where it is assumed that D(z) has only simple poles. (If D(2) has
multiple poles, the method of parallel programming is of course still
applicable.) D(z) may also be written as
when
n
D(2) = Σ Dx(2)
Dx(2)
=
1
k=1
Ak
bol - dxz-¹
0
(9-42)
(9-43)
D(z) can be realized by the n simple digital programs for D₁(z),
D₂(x), . . ., D.(z), operating in parallel as shown in Fig. 9-9b.
The pulse transfer function Da(z) is realized by the simple digital
program depicted in Fig. 9-9c.
ex(1)
ex(1)
D(z)
(a)
D₁(z)
e*(1)
+
D₂(z)
e(1)
Dn(z)
(b)
A/Do
dk
T
Storage
(c)
Fig. 9-9 (a) Digital programming. (b) Parallel programming. (c)
Ak
Digital program of D₁(2) b。 1 - dxz-¹

288 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
(d) Pulsed-data Processing Units or Special-purpose Computers. In
the method of realizing a pulse transfer function by digital pro-
gramming, a program of a general-purpose digital computer is written
so that when the machine reads this program, it will carry out the
mathematical operations described by the specific pulse transfer
function. When different pulse transfer functions are being realized,
the same digital computer may be used with variations in the
programming. On the other hand, a special-purpose computer, some-
times also referred to as a pulsed-data processing unit, may be built
specially for the realization of a specific pulse transfer function D(z).
However, a pulsed-data processing unit is good only for the reali-
zation of a certain pulse transfer function. Separate computers must
be built to realize different pulse tranfer functions.
The principle of realization of D(z) by a pulsed-data processing
unit is similar to that of digital programming described in the
preceding sections. In essence the data processing unit should be
capable of performing specific arithmetic manipulations such as multi-
plication, time delays, and addition and subtraction. In a data
processing unit these arithmetic manipulations may be implemented
by transmission lines for time delays, potentiometers and summing
amplifiers for multiplication, weighting, and subtraction and addition.
These operations need not be carried out by digital elements only.
Sometimes digital as well as analog devices may be used in the
implementation of a pulsed-data processing unit.
To illustrate the realization of a pulse transfer function by a
pulsed-data processing unit, the following simple example is con-
sidered.
Example 9-2
Consider the pulse transfer function
D(z) =
---
(1 -0.62-1)
(1 0.342-¹)
=
Ea(z)
E₁(2)
(9-44)
which evidently is physically realizable. Cross multiplying in Eq. (9-44)
and taking the inverse z-transform yields
-
e(t) 0.6 e(t − T) = e(t) −0.34 e(t − T)
-
-
(9-45)
where T is the sampling period in seconds. Solving for e* (t) in the last
equation, we have
e* (t) = e(t) 0.6 e(t T) + 0.34 e(t - T)
(9-46)
The block diagram of the computer for the realization of Eq. (9-46) is shown
in Fig. 9-10.
Note that the block diagram of the data processing unit in Fig. 9-10 is
identical to that of the digital programming of the same D(z). However, the

Sec. 9.3
289
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
e*(1)
T
(0.6)
Delay line
pot.
(0.34)
pot.
Delay line
T
e2(1)
T
Fig. 9-10 Realization of pulse-transfer function by a pulse-data
processing unit.
difference is that in Fig. 9-10, the elements of the block diagram represent
actual physical components, whereas in the digital programming the diagram
represents the sequence of arithmetic manipulations of a general-purpose
computer. In the realization of the pulse transfer function of Eq. (9–44), the
data processing unit requires two delay lines, two potentiometers, and one
summing amplifier.
9.3 DIGITAL COMPENSATION DESIGN THROUGH
BILINEAR TRANSFORMATION
=
In Sec. 8.3 the bilinear transformations z (r + 1)/(r− 1) and
z = (1 + w)/(1 - w) were used for the Bode diagram design of
continuous-data network compensation of sampled-data systems. In
a similar fashion the extension of the Bode diagram method to the
design of digital compensation may be easily carried out if any one
of the bilinear transformations is utilized. In fact, the Bode diagram
design of digital compensation in the r or the w domain is more
straightforward than that of the continuous network compensation,
since the transfer function of the digital controller can be adjusted
independently without affecting the transfer functions of the other
parts of the system. Therefore, the effects of the adjustment and
variation of the poles and zeros of D(w) (or D(r)) upon the over-
all system behavior are easily observed.
With reference to the system shown in Fig. 9-1a, the design
procedure of the digital compensation is outlined as follows:
(1) Assuming that the w-transformation is used, determine the
w-transform function GoG₁(w) of the uncompensated system by
substituting z = (1 + w)/(1-w) into G10G1(2).
Go
(2) Construct the Bode diagram for GoG₁(w) in magnitude
versus ww and phase shift versus ww. Transfer the plots in the Bode
diagram to the Nichols chart if necessary. Predict the dynamic
behavior of the uncompensated system by finding the phase margin,

290
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
gain margin, resonant frequency, and bandwidth from the Bode plot
and the Nichols chart.
(3) Should the system need compensation, the open-loop trans-
fer function of the system with digital compensation becomes
D(w)GoG₁(w). A proper digital controller D(w) is to be selected
so that the desired system performance specifications are satisfied.
The selection of D(w) simply follows the conventional technique
of compensating continuous-data systems, which involves a trial-and-
error procedure and is to some extent based on the experience and
the imagination of the designer.
The physical realizability of D(z) requires that it have at least
as many poles as zeros or that m>n in Eq. (9-3). To determine
the restrictions on D(w) so that the corresponding D(2) is always
realizable, let us consider that D(w) is described by the form
-1
·
+ Co
D(w) =
dqw" + dq-1w9-1 +
+do
(9-47)
where c and d are constant coefficients and p and q are positive
integers. Substituting w = (≈ − 1)/(x + 1) into Eq. (9-47) and
simplifying, we have
D(2)
=
Apz³ + Ap-1ZP-1 +
baz + bq-124-1+
ao
.
.
+ αo (x + 1)α-D
+ bo
(9-48)
where a and b are related to c and d, respectively. Equation (9-48)
indicates that D(z) has the same number of poles and zeros regard-
less of the relative magnitudes of p and q. This means that the
physical realizability condition of D(z) does not affect the condition.
of the number of zeros and poles of D(w). Thus in Eq. (9–47) p
and q can be chosen arbitrarily and the corresponding D(z) will
always have the same number of poles and zeros. However, if it is
desired that the digital controller is stable, then all the poles of
D(w) must lie in the left-half of the w-plane (corresponding to the
inside of the unit circle in the z-plane), and in addition D(w) must
not have more zeros than poles. From Eq. (9-48) note that if p > q,
D(z) will have (p − q) poles at 2 = 1 that correspond to sustained
oscillatory responses. However, an unstable pulse transfer function
is considered realizable. In certain cases the use of unstable digital
controllers is even desirable.
z
(4) Once D(w) is determined, D(z) is obtained by substituting
w = (x − 1)/(x + 1) into D(w). The final step in the design involves
the realization of D(z) by one of the methods discussed in Sec. 9.2.
To illustrate the procedures of design presented, an example
follows.

Sec. 9.3
291
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
R(s)
E(s)
E(s)
D(s)
Gno(s)
G₁(s)
C(s)
Esit
из
Digital controller D(z)
Fig. 9-11 Sampled-data control system with digital compensation.
Example 9-3
Consider the sampled-data feedback control system shown in Fig. 9-11.
The fixed parts of the system are described by the transfer function
K
G₁(s)
s(1 +0.1s)(1 + 0.5s)
(9-49)
The sampling period is 0.5 sec. Design a digital controller for the system to
meet the following specifications:
The velocity error constant K, ≥ 1.5
The phase margin .M. ≥ 50 deg.
The resonant peak M, ≤1.3
The open-loop transfer function of the uncompensated system is given by
1 e-Ts
K
Gho(s) G₁(s)
=
S
s(1 + 0.1s)(1 + 0.5s)
The z-transform of Gho(s) G₁(s) with T = 0.5 sec. is
(9-50)
ог
GhoG₁(2)
-
K(0.13x² + 0.177z + 0.0092),
2(x-1)(20.350
-0054
GhoG₁(2) =
0.13K(z+ 1.31)(x + 0.054)
z(z1)(x 0.368)
Applying the final-value theorem to Eq. (9-52), we found that for K,
the gain constant K must equal 3.
O
(9-51)
(9-52)
=
1.5
Substitution of z = (1+w)/(1 - w) and K = 3 into Eq. (9-52) yields
GhoG₁(w)=
=
0.75(1 w)(1 + 0.9w)(1 − 0.134w)
w(1 + w)(1 + 2.17w)
(9-53)
The Bode plot of GoG₁(w) is plotted in Fig. 9-12. Note from the Bode
diagram that for K
3 the uncompensated system is on the verge of becoming
unstable. (It can be shown that marginal value of K for stability is equal to
3.3.) The phase margin of the system is approximately zero deg. To obtain
a phase margin of 50 deg while maintaining the velocity constant at 1.5, a
phase-lag model is suggested for D(w), since phase-lead compensation is
ineffective under the circumstances.
Let the transfer function of D(w) be of the form
1+ AT W
D(w)
=
1 + TW
(9-54)
To realize a phase margin of 50 deg, the gain crossover of the system
should be shifted from ww
-
0.6 to @w
-
0.2, provided that the phase shift
at this new gain crossover is not affected very much by the phase-lag com-

292 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
80
60
40
20
db
Magnitude curve of GroG₁(w)
(uncompensated system)
O
-20
Magnitude curve of
D(w) GnoGq(w)
(compensated system)-
-40
1
-60
I
7.46
-80
0.001
0.005 0.01 0.02
O.I
0.462 1.0
10
ww
0°
-90°
-180°
-270°
-360°
0.001
0.01
Phase shift
(compensated)
O.I
ww
50°
Phase shift (uncompensated)
1.0
10
Fig. 9-12 Bode diagram of sampled-data system with digital
compensation in Example 9-3.
=
pensation. The Bode plot indicates that the open-loop gain of the uncom-
pensated system at ww 0.2 is approximately +12 db. Therefore, to make
0.2 the new gain crossover, the phase-lag model of D(w) must provide
12 db of attenuation at this frequency (ww) and thus determine the distance
between the two corner frequencies of D(w); therefore,
ww
ww
a = 10-12/20 = 0.25
(9-55)
Choosing the upper corner frequency of D(w) at one decade below
= 0.2, we have
Thus
1/ат
1/T
=
0.02
0.005
(9-56)
(9-57)
The digital controller is then described by the w-transfer function

Sec. 9.3
293
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
1 + 50w
D(w)
=
1 + 100w
(9-58)
The open-loop transfer function of the compensated system is given by
— -
0.75(1+50w) (1 w)(1 + 0.9w)(1 − 0.134w)
w(1+100w) (1+w)( +2.17w)
D(w)GoG, (w) =
(9-59)
The Bode plot of the compensated system is now plotted in Fig. 9-12. Note
that the phase margin is now approximately equal to 50 deg and is satis-
factory.
The magnitudes and phase shifts of GoG(w) and D(w) GhoG, (w) are
plotted in the Nichols chart as shown in Fig. 9-13. From these curves and
the Nichols chart, the following quantities on the system's performance are
measured and comparisons are made between the compensated and the
uncompensated system.

40
0.01-
30
(Uncompensated)
Ο.ΟΙ
Gno G₁(w)
0.02
20
M=1.12
0.3
1.2
1.3
db 10
2.0
0.02
0.06
3.0
0.5
4.0
0.6
1.0
0.9
0.5
-10
ww
TO.6
ww
-20
1.0
8448
-30
-260-240
-220 -200
0.2
0.4 M=0.707
(Compensated)
D(w)GnoG₁(w)
-180 -160
-140 -120
-100-90
Phase shift (deg)
Fig. 9-13 Nichols chart and the plots of the open-loop transfer
functions for the compensated and the uncompensated system in
Example 9-3.

294 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
Uncompensated
system
almost infinite
Compensated
system
1.2
Resonant peak Mp
Resonant frequency wwr(w)
0.6 (2.1 rad/sec)
0.2 (0.8 rad/sec)
•
Phase margin . M.
≈ 0 deg
50 deg
Gain margin G. M.
≈ 0 db
12 db
Bandwidth BW (rad/sec)
0.9 (3 rad/sec)
0.4 (1.5 rad/sec)
The final steps in the design involve the determination of D(z) from
D(w) and the realization of D(z) by any one of the methods described in
Sec. 9-2. Substituting w (≈ − 1)/(≈ + 1) into Eq. (9-58) yields
==
3.75.1062
ww
Ge(s)
Zero-order
hold
1.25-106.0
Gno(s)
L
10μ
Gc(s) —
10μf
(S)H
pot.
0.25
ww
-D(z)·
(a)
Gro(s)
1.22-106
H(s)
(b)
0.24
T
pot.
Delay line
(c)
·D(z)-
T
0.99
T
pot.
Delay line
→
Summing
amplifier
D(z) = 0.25(x − 0.96)/(z — 0.99)
-
Fig. 9-14 Various ways of realizing the digital controller in the
system of Example 9-3.

Sec. 9.4
295
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
D(z) = 0.25
2
0.96
0.99
(9-60)
By use of the techniques described in Sec. 9-2, the pulse transfer function
of the digital controller D(z) is realized by a series pulsed-data network, a
feedback pulsed-data network, and a pulsed-data processing unit.
First, for a series pulsed-data network, we substitute D(z) into Eq. (9-7)
which leads to
Ge(s)
1 + 12.5s
=
1 + 50s
(9-61)
The RC network which realizes Ge(s) and the series pulsed-data network for
the realization of D(z) are shown in Fig. 9-14a.
For the feedback pulsed-data network realization, we substitute D(z) from
Eq. (9-60) into Eq. (9-16). This leads to
H(s)
=
3s
s + 0.082
(9-62)
The RC network for the realization of H(s) and the feedback pulsed-data
network which realizes D(z) are shown in Fig. 9-14b.
Finally, the block diagram of the pulsed-data processing unit realization
of D(z) is depicted in Fig. 9-14c. The diagram can also be regarded as the
schematic diagram of the direct programming of a digital computer.
9.4 DESIGN IN THE Z-PLANE USING THE ROOT LOCUS
In Sec. 6.7 the root locus technique has been extended to the
analysis of sampled-data feedback control systems. Note that prefer-
rably the root locus plots for sampled-data systems should be plotted
in the z-plane and that their properties are quite similar to those
of the root locus for continuous-data systems in the s-plane. There-
fore, the application of the root locus method to the analysis of
sampled-data control systems is quite straightforward. Once the root
loci of the characteristic equation are plotted in the z-plane, much
knowledge concerning the transient response of the system can be
gathered by observing the location of the roots for the particular
loop gain K.
On the other hand, the design of sampled-data control systems
can also be carried out in the z-plane using the root locus. In essence,
the design of a sampled-data system in the z-plane involves the
search for a set of characteristic equation roots that give rise to a
satisfactory over-all system performance. In terms of the root locus
design, these desirable characteristic equation roots are found by
reshaping the root loci of the original system through adjustment
of the loop gain and the use of compensation networks. The most

296 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
elementary problem in root locus design is the determination of the
loop gain to yield suitable relative stability. The loop gain of the
system can be adjusted to give appropriate dynamic performance as
measured by the position of the complex poles with respect to the
constant damping ratio curves inside the unit circle. However, no
simple rules are available for the determination of appropriate com-
pensation networks from the root locus diagram. In most design prob-
lems the effects on the characteristic equation roots when the loop
gain K, as well as other parameters, is varied must be studied.
Therefore, the design in the z-plane with root locus usually involves
a certain amount of trial-and-error. Usually, some knowledge on
the effect of adding or shifting of open-loop poles and zeros on the
shape of a root locus is helpful on the part of the designer. The
use of the root contour method is also illustrated in this chapter
when a sampled-data system has variable parameters other than K.
In the design of continuous-data control systems, usually, the
design may fall into one of the following categories: (1) phase-lead
compensation, (2) phase-lag compensation, and (3) cancellation com-
pensation. Other more complex schemes of course do exist, but
knowing the effects of these three basic types of compensation
usually gives a designer much insight into the design problem. With
reference to the design of sampled-data systems by the Bode diagram,
the basic forms of the compensating network D(w) or D(r) have
also been classified as phase-lead and phase-lag; and certainly can-
cellation compensation can always be used whenever and wherever
feasible. Therefore, in the following paragraphs, the design of com-
pensation for sampled-data systems is also described as phase-lead,
phase-lag, or cancellation.
Phase-Lead Compensation
A simple phase-lead network model in the w-domain is described.
by the transfer function
1 + ATW
D(w)
=
1 + τω
(a > 1)
(9-63)
where is a constant greater than or equal to zero. The D(w) in
Eq. (9-63) is referred to as a phase-lead transfer function, since in
terms of the Bode diagram it produces positive phase shift that may
be added to the system phase shift in the vicinity of the gain cross-
over frequency (ww) to increase the phase margin. However, the
B. C. Kuo, Automatic Control Systems, (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall,
Inc., 1962), Chapter 8.

Sec. 9.4
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 297
use of phase-lead compensation is not recommended under all cir-
cumstances. In fact, it has been shown that the use of phase-lead
compensation is unlikely to bring satisfactory results when the
uncompensated system has the following properties:
(1) when the transfer function of the controlled process G₁(w)
has two poles that are close together and the corner frequencies
are located near the gain crossover frequency (ww) in the Bode plot
(2) when the transfer function of the controlled process G₁(w)
has a pair of complex conjugate poles located near the gain cross-
over
Both the above cases will cause the phase shift curve of G₁(w)
to vary rapidly near 180 degrees.
-
-
(3) when the uncompensated system is initially unstable or lightly
damped.
For these same reasons phase-lead compensations were not recom-
mended in the illustrative examples on the design of sampled-data
systems (Example 9-3, for instance).
With reference to Eq. (9–63), the pole-zero configuration of D(w)
is shown in Fig. 9-15a. Note that the pole and the zero of D(w)
ww
w-plane
Unit
circle
-1/T
-1/07
1-T
1+T
(a)
(b)
z-plane
+1
1-07
1+0T
Fig. 9-15 Pole-zero configurations of phase-lead network.
always lie on the negative real axis in the w-plane with the zero.
to the right of the pole. Substitution of w = (z − 1)/(z+1) into
Eq. (9-63) yields
D(x) = (a + +
ат +1
1) 2 + (1
AT)/(1+AT)
+1 2 + (1-T)/(1+T)
(9-64)
Since and a are both positive numbers and since a > 1, the
pole and the zero of D(z) always lie on the real axis on or inside
the unit circle in the z-plane; the zero is always to the right of the
+ B. C. Kuo, Automatic Control Systems, (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
1962), Chapter 9.

298
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
pole. A typical set of pole-zero configuration of D(z) is shown in
Fig. 9-15b.
Having established the pole-zero properties of the phase-lead
model of D(z), we shall now use the following illustrative example
to investigate its effects on the reshaping of the root loci.
Example 9-4
A sampled-data feedback control system with digital compensation is
shown in Fig. 9–16. The controlled process of the system is described by the
transfer function
R(s)
E(s) X
D(s)
Gno(s) G₁(s)
Zero-order Controlled
hold
C(s)
process
Digital controller D(z)
Fig. 9-16 Sampled-data control system in Example 9-4.
Z
G₁(s) =
=
K
5(s+1)
(9-65)
The sampling period is one second. The open-loop transfer function of the
system without compensation is
0.368(+0.717)
GhoG₁(z)
=
(≈ − 1)(z — 0.368)
(9-66)
The root locus diagram of the uncompensated system is plotted in Fig. 9–17.
Note that the complex conjugate part of the root loci is a circle with center
720-368
z-plane
K=2.43
8-1
K-
717
K=Q
Ο
IK=0
+0.368-
K=2.43
T = 1 sec
Fig. 9-17 Root locus diagram of the system in Example 9-4
without compensation.

Sec. 9.4
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 299
at z = -0.717 and a radius of 1.37. The closed-loop system becomes unstable
for all values of K greater than 2.43. Let us assume that K is set at this
marginal value so that the two characteristic equation roots are on the unit
circle as shown in Fig. 9-17.
Suppose that the transfer function D(z) of the digital controller is of the
form
D(≈) = (
(ar + 1)
ат
T+1
-
2 + (1 AT)/(1 + AT)
≈ + (1
− T)/(1 + T)
where for phase-lead compensation, a > 1 and ∞ > > 0.
(9-67)
The constant factor (aT +1)/(T +1)_in_D(z) is necessary, since the
insertion of the digital controller should not effect the velocity error constant
K, while improving the stability of the system. In other words, D(z) must
satisfy the condition
lim D(z)
=
1
2-1
(9-68)
The design problem now essentially involves the determination of appro-
priate values for a and 7 so that the system is stabilized. However, at this
point, how the values of a and 7 should be chosen is not clear. Although we
know from the properties of root loci that an added open-loop zero has the
effect of pulling the root loci toward it, whereas an additional open-loop pole
has a tendency to push the loci away, no simple ways exist for telling which
combinations are the most effective for stabilizing the system because of the
unlimited number of possible combinations of the pole and zero of D(z).
Several sets of values of a and 7 are used in the following to illustrate the
effects of the phase-lead compensation. As a first trial, let a = 6.06 and
T = 0.165. The transfer function of the digital controller reads
D(z) = 1.72
༤
z + 0.717
and the open-loop transfer function of the compensated system is
0.64K≈
D(z) G10G,(z) =
(≈ − 1)(≈ − 0.368)
(9-69)
(9-70)
The root loci of the compensated system are shown in Fig. 9-18 as loci (2).
Note that although the complex conjugate portion of the loci lie inside the
unit circle, we should not jump to the conclusion that the phase-lead com-
pensated system is more stable. As a matter of fact, for K = 2.43 one of the
roots of the characteristic equation is on the negative real axis outside the
unit circle, and the system is unstable. This simply shows that for the values
chosen for a and 7, the compensated system is worse than the original system.
Four other sets of values for a and 7 are tried, and the corresponding
root loci of the compensated systems are plotted in Fig. 9-18. (Only the
positive complex conjugate parts of the root loci are shown.) The characteristic
equation roots of the compensated systems when K = 2.43 are indicated on
the loci. The pole and zero locations of D(z) of the various compensations
are tabulated in Table 9-1. From the root locus diagram, we see that among
the five compensations only when a - = 2, T = 0.4, and a = 3, T= = 0.1

300
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
z-plane
Uncompensated (1)
(5)
K = 2.43
(6)
K = 2.43
(4)
(3)
-0.717
0.368
K=2.43
(2)
(2)
(1) Uncompensated
(2) = 0.165, a = 6.06
(3) T = 0.1, 0 = 3
(4) T = 0.4, a = 2
(5) T=1, 0=2
Unit circle
(6) σ = 3, α= 3
ат +
D(x) = (a+1
2 + (1 - AT)/(1 + AT)
≈ + (1 − 7)/(1 + 7)
Fig. 9-18 Root loci of the uncompensated and compensated
systems for Example 9-4.
result in stable systems. But then the damping ratios of the systems are less
than 10 percent, and from Fig. 6-20 we can predict that the overshoots of
the step responses would exceed 70 percent, a circumstance which is unaccept-
able under almost any circumstances.
Note that the system is improved, though only slightly, when the value
of is relatively small. However, if the value of 7 is too small, the pole of
D(z) will move very close to the 1 point; and since one root locus starts
at this pole and ends at -∞, the compensated system will be very lightly
damped or unstable. On the other hand, the root loci in Fig. 9-18 show that
for large values of the phase-lead compensation also results in unstable
systems.
The general ineffectiveness of the phase-lead compensation is anticipated
in this problem, since the original system is on the verge of instability and
this situation is one for which phase-lead compensation is not recommended.
In the next section we shall see that a phase-lag compensation is more satis-
factory for improving the stability of this system.
We can also show that if the loop gain K is reduced from the value of
2.43, the effectiveness of the phase-lead compensation is improved; however,
this improvement is usually at the expense of higher bandwidth and resonant
frequency.

Sec. 9.4
301
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
TABLE 9-1
pole and zero of D(2) = ( (a 7 + 1) =
T
a
z + (1 − ar)/(1 + aT)
≈ + (1 − 7)/ (1 + ↑)
Zero of D(z)
-0.538
Pole of D(z)
-0.818
0.1
3
0.165
6.06
0
-0.717
0.4
2
-0.111
-0.375
1.0
2
+0.333
0
3.0
3
+0.80
+0.50
Phase-Lag Compensation
A second possibility for simple compensation is available in the
phase lag model. In the w-domain, a simple phase-lag model is given
by the transfer function
D(w)
=
1 + ATW
1+ TW
(9-71)
where 0 < a <1 and 0 <T<∞.
In the design method using the Bode diagram, the attenuation
property of D(w) at high frequency (ww) is utilized to move the
gain crossover of the uncompensated system to a lower point where
the desired phase margin is measured. So that a significant amount
of phase lag will be contributed near the new gain crossover, the
upper corner frequency 1/7 of D(w) should be placed far below the
Aww
w-plane
-1/07
-1/7
z-plane
Unit circle.
HE
1+T
1-07
1+07
(a)
(a) D(w)
=
(b)
1 + ατω
(a < 1)
1 + τω
ат + 1
(b) D(x) = (+1
z + (1 − aT)/(1 + ar)
-
2 + (1 − T)/ (1 + 7)
Fig. 9-19 Pole-zero configurations of phase-lag network.

302
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
new gain crossover. Therefore, in the phase-lag compensation the
value of 7 is very large.
T
Since D(w) in Eq. (9-71) is identical to the transfer function
for the phase-lead compensator only when a <1 for phase-lag, the
z-transform of Eq. (9-71) is also expressed by Eq. (9-67) with a <1.
The pole-zero configuration of the phase-lag D(w) and D(z) are
depicted in Fig. 9-19. Note that since a is less than unity, the pole
always lies to the right of the zero.
The same sampled-data control system used for Example 9-4 is
used in the following illustrative example to show the effects of the
phase-lag compensation in the root locus diagram.
Example 9-5
Consider the same system given in Example 9-4 with K = 2.43. The system
(3)
(2)
Uncompensated
(1)
K=2.431
-0.717
Ο
z-plane
14)
K=2.43
-X-
0.368
Unit circle
(1) Uncompensated
(2) σ = 0.1, a = 0.5
(3) T = 0.4, a = 0.5
(4) T=1.0, a = 0.5
D(z)
=
'AT + 1)2 + (1) AT)/(1+ AT)
T+1 ≈ + (1 − T)/(1 + 7)
Fig. 9-20 Root loci of the uncompensated and the phase-lag
compensated system for Example 9-5.

Sec. 9.4
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 303
is now to be stabilized by means of the simple phase-lag compensator of Eq.
(9-71).
First, we shall investigate the effects of the phase-lag compensation on
the root loci when small values of T are chosen. With a 0.5, the root loci
of the system with the phase-lag compensation are plotted for τ = = 0.1, 0.4,
and 1.0, as shown in Fig. 9-20. (Only the positive complex conjugate parts
of the loci are shown.) For small values of 7, the phase-lag compensation
has made the system unstable. This simply verifies the conclusion we obtained
from the Bode diagram method that, for the phase-lag compensation to be
effective, the value of 7 should be relatively large.
Let us assume that the design specification requires the damping ratio of
the complex closed-loop poles to be approximately 60 percent. Referring to
locus (1) in Fig. 9-21, which is the root locus of the original system, we note
that the complex closed-loop poles have a damping ratio of 60 percent when
the loop gain K is equal to 0.5. In essence, the phase-lag compensation can be
regarded as a means of increasing the velocity error constant K, by a ratio
of 4.86 (=2.43/0.5), while keeping the complex closed-loop poles relatively
unaffected. Since T is to be very large and since a is less than unity, the pole
Uncompensated
(1)
-0.717
1
z-plane
(2)
(3)
K=2.43
K=2.43
=0.6 K=0.5
(2)
0 0.368
0.98
0.905
Unit circle
(1) Uncompensated
(2) σ = 100, a = 0.2
(3) T=50, α=0.2
D(x) = (a+1)² +++ (1 = 7)/(1+r)
+ (1 − aT)/(1 + ar)
−
Fig. 9-21 Root loci of the uncompensated and the phase-lag
compensated system for Example 9-5.

304 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
=
and zero of D(z) will appear as an integrating dipole near the point z = +1.
Therefore, the complex conjugate parts of the original root loci are not affected
significantly by the addition of the integrating dipole, since from points on these
loci the dipole and the pole of GhoG,(z) at z 1 appear as a simple pole. In
order to increase the velocity error constant by a factor of 4.86 (from K = 0.5
to K = 2.43), the constant ratio a of the integrating dipole should be chosen
to be at least 1/4.86, preferably 1/5, to allow the dipole to contribute a slight
phase lag near the new gain crossover. Thus we let a = 0.2, and is chosen
to be 100. As will be shown, the exact value of 7 is not critical. Substituting
these values of a and 7 into Eq. (9-67) yields the transfer function of the
phase-lag controller
D(z) = 0.191
ะ
2
- 0.905
0.98
The open-loop transfer function of the compensated system is
D(z) GhoG₁(z) =
=
---
0.07K(z — 0.905) (≈ + 0.717)
(1)(≈ 0.368) (≈
=
0.98)
(9-72)
(9-73)
In Fig. 9-21 the root loci of the phase-lag compensated system are shown as
loci (2). Note that the complex roots for K = 2.43 on the compensated loci
lie very close to the roots for K 0.5 on the uncompensated loci. As a matter
of fact, for the values of a and 7 chosen, the addition of the integrating dipole
has affected the shape of the original root loci only slightly except for the
small loop of loci around the dipole.
The root loci of the compensated system when a = 0.2 and 7 = 50 are
also plotted in Fig. 9-21 (loci 3). For K = 2.43, the complex characteristic
equation roots lie very close to those of loci (2). This shows that the precise
location of the dipole is not critical, as long as it is close to the z = +1
point.
The Root Contour Method
The root contour diagram of a closed-loop system is the plot of
the roots of the characteristic equation when any system parameter
other than the open-loop gain K is varying. Apparently, the root
contour diagram is quite useful in the design of feedback control
systems, since it can be used to indicate the effects of variations in
the poles and zeros of the open-loop transfer function. By use of
the root contour plot, the effects of phase-lead and phase-lag com-
pensations may be clearly indicated, and appropriate values of the
parameters of the controllers can be easily determined.
As an illustrative example to the root contour method, let us
consider the sampled-data system given in Example 9-3 and Example
9-4. Since the phase-lead and the phase-lag controllers have basically
the same transfer function, but with different ranges for a, the open-
loop transfer function of the sampled-data system with either com-
pensation is given by

Sec. 9.4
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 305
D(z) GhoG1(z)
=
(x + 1) + ar(x-1)
(2 + 1) + T(≈ − 1)
X
0.368K (z+ 0.717)
(x-1)(≈ 0.368)
(9-74)
When K = 2.43, the characteristic equation of the compensated
system is written
-
(x + 1)[(x − 1)(≈ 0.368) + 0.89) (z+0.717)]
-
—
+ T(x − 1)²( z − 0.368) + 0.89aт( z − 1)(≈ +0.717) = 0 (9-75)
Equation (9-75) is considered to have two variable parameters in
a and T. First, we let a = 0, but consider that is varied from 0
to ∞. Then, Eq. (9-75) is reduced to
-
7
(x + 1)[≈ − 1)(≈ − 0.368) + 0.89(≈ + 0.717)]
-
+ T(x − 1)²(≈ − 0.368) = 0
K=2.43
(9-76)
z-plane
Root contour
(a = 0)
T=0.1
T=0.4
T=0
7=1
T=3
Root locus of
uncompensated system
7=10
T=100
T=40
T=0.4
T=40
T=0.1
T=1
848
T=100
848
ett
O
0.368
+1
T=3
7=10
∞
Root contour
(a = 0)
Unit circle
K=2.43
Root contour
(a = 0)
X-
----
poles of G(z)
zeros of G(z)
G(z)
=
7(z — 1)²(z — 0.368)
(≈ + 1)[(≈ − 1)(≈ − 0.368) + 0.89(z − 0.717)]
-
Fig. 9-22 Root contours of the sampled-data control system in
Example 9-3, with as the variable parameter, K = 2.43 and
a = 0.

306 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
Dividing both sides of Eq. (9-76) by the terms that do not contain
T, we have
1 +
-
T(x 1) (2 -0.368)
(≈ + 1)[(≈ −1 )( z − 0.368) + 0.89(≈ + 0.717)]
Since Eq. (9-77) can be written into the form of
T
1 + G(z) = 0
=
0
(9-77)
(9-78)
with appearing in G(z) as a multiplying factor, the conventional
root locus method can be applied to the plotting of the root contours
of Eq. (9-76) when 7 is varied from 0 to ∞. A further investigation
of Eq. (9-77) reveals that the denominator of the equivalent G(z)
is identical to the characteristic equation of the original system
multiplied by a factor (z+1). Thus, the poles of G(z) are found
at the points where K = 2.43 on the original loci of the uncompensated
system and at z = -1. The zeros of G(z) are obtained readily from
Eq. (9-77) at z = 1, 1, and 0.368; these zeros correspond to the
ending points of the root contours. Now the pole-zero configuration
of G(z) is depicted in Fig. 9-22, and the root contours when 7 is
varied from 0 to ∞ are plotted accordingly. Note that the starting
points of the root contours lie at the points of the original root
loci where K = 2.43.
Now consider that a as well as 7, is varied from 0 to ∞. Dividing
through Eq. (9-75) by the terms that do not contain a yields
1 +
0.89aT(21)(x + 0.717)
―
(≈ + 1)[(≈ − 1)(≈ − 0.368) + 0.89(≈ + 0.717)]
which is of the form
+ T(x − 1)²(z - 0.368)
1+ G'(z) = 0
with a appearing as a multiplying factor.
=
= 0
(9-79)
(9-30)
Again, we notice that the denominator of G'(z) is identical to
the left side of Eq. (9-76), whose roots when is varied are rep-
resented by the root contours of Fig. 9-22. This implies that the
root contours of Eq. (9-75) start at points on the root contours of
Fig. 9-22 where a is variable but has any fixed positive value.
The ending points of the root contours are at the zeros of G'(z),
namely, ≈ 1 and 2 = 0.717.
z =
z
The root contours of Eq. (9-75) with a as the varying parameter
are plotted in Fig. 9-23 for various fixed values of 7. (Only the
positive complex conjugate parts of the contours are shown.) Note.
that all the contours pass through the two complex roots of the
original system (K = 2.43); and the corresponding value of a at
1

Sec. 9.4
307
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Root contours
1<0
T = constant
(lead compensation)

z-plane
T=1
a=1
T=0 T=0.1
Root contours
0<a<1
T = constant
(lag compensation)
Root contour
(a=0)
x7=3
K=2.43
T=0.4
Ideal
lead compensation
D(z)=(2+1)+07(2-1)
(z+1)
ex-x-
-0.717
XT=10
T=40
XT=100
844
+1
Root locus of
uncompensated system
G'(x) =
0.89ar(x-1)(x+0.717)
poles of G'(z)
zeros of G'(z)
(z+1)[(x-1)(z−0.368)+0.89(≈+0.717)]+7(z−1)²(z−0.368)
Fig. 9-23 Root contours of the sampled-data control system in
Example 9-3. a and 7 are both variable; K = 2.43.
the points is unity; since for a = 1, D(w) is unity, the system is
without compensation.
The effects of the phase-lead and the phase-lag compensation are
clearly observed from the root contour plots of Fig. 9-23. For a > 1,
the compensation is phase-lead. The general ineffectiveness of the
phase-lead compensation for this problem is clearly illustrated by
the root contours. For large values of 7, the root contours for a > 1
lie mostly outside the unit circle. Although for very small values
of the root contours for a> 1 may lie inside the unit circle, the
corresponding real pole of G'(z) is very close to the 1 point (see
Fig. 9-22); and since one of the root contours extends from this
pole to along the negative real axis, the system is not much
improved.
-

308
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
On the other hand, when a <1, the compensation is phase-lag.
The root contours again indicate clearly that the system is unstable
for small values of T. But the system can be stabilized at will if a
large value of is used.
Cancellation Compensation
On a theoretical basis at least, it is always possible to use a
digital compensator with poles and zeros that can cancel the un-
desirable poles and zeros of the controlled process transfer function,
and new open-loop poles and zeros can be inserted at more advan-
tageous locations in the z-plane to satisfy the design specifications.
The cancellation compensation suggested above is often used in
systems that have complex poles in the controlled process, since in
such cases simple phase-lead compensation is known to be ineffective.
However, the cancellation compensation does not always furnish a
completely satisfactory solution to a design problem, Quite often,
the resulting compensator may involve excessive complexity; and if
the undesirable complex poles of the controlled process are near the
unit circle in the z-plane, inexact cancellation can often result in a
z-plane
z-plane
ON
O
(a)
QX
+1
Root
locus
Unit circle
Root
locus
(b)
z-plane
P₁
1+1
+1
Unit circle
(c)
Unit circle
Fig. 9-24 Root locus diagrams illustrating the effects of inexact
cancellation of undesirable poles.

Sec. 9.5
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 309
conditionally stable system. As a simple example to the effect of
inexact cancellation, let us refer to the root locus diagrams given
in Fig. 9-24. In Fig. 9-24a the pole-zero configuration of the open-
loop transfer function of a hypothetical sampled-data system is shown.
A digital controller with the transfer function
-
-
D(z) = K₁
(≈ − p₁)(z — P2)
(za)(zb)
(9-81)
is devised to cancel the complex poles at p₁ and p, and to add new
poles at z = a and z = b. Figure 9-24b shows a particular case of
inexact cancellation, which occurs when the complex zeros of the
digital controller are not exactly equal to the poles p and p₂ of
the controlled process. In this case, the inexact cancellation does
not have any adverse effect on the performance of the compensated
system, since the closed-loop dipole near p₁ and p as a result of
the inexact cancellation, does not contribute significantly to either
the transient or the frequency response.
On the other hand, if the poles and zeros of the inexact cancel-
lation are arranged as shown in Fig. 9-24c, parts of the root loci
between the uncancelled pole and zero pairs lie outside the unit
circle. Then the system may be conditionally stable or even unstable.
9.5 SYNTHESIS IN THE Z-PLANE
Thus far, the frequency domain and the root locus method of
design of the digital compensation of sampled-data control systems
have been discussed. The principal disadvantage of these methods
of design lies in the extent of the cut-and-try effort imposed on the
designer. In proceeding from specifications to the final system, the
designer must base his decisions on his past experiences and on the
nature of the problem and select an appropriate compensator to
modify the open-loop system in such a way that the closed-loop
system is satisfactory. If as the result of the designer's first rough
guess, the specifications are not met by the system, he must keep
on modifying the open-loop system until the closed-loop system has
a satisfactory performance.
A logical synthesis procedure should be devised to enable the
designer to proceed from specifications to the final system in a
straightforward manner. A well-known method for the synthesis of
linear continuous-data control systems using pole-zero configurations
in the s-plane was first set forth by Truxal. The philosophy of
↑ J. G. Truxal, Automatic Feedback Control System Synthesis, (New York: McGraw-
Hill Book Company, 1955), Chapter 5.

310 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
Truxal's synthesis will be extended to the synthesis of sampled-data
control systems in this section.
The synthesis procedure essentially involves the following three
steps:
(1) The closed-loop z-transfer function of the final system is
determined from the specifications and the fixed parts of the system.
(2) The corresponding z-transfer functions of the open-loop system
and the digital controller are found.
(3) The digital controller is synthesized.
In contrast to the conventional design methods, the synthesis
procedure outlined above enables the designer to work with the
over-all system function, so that in a sense the system is forced to
meet the specifications.
Determination of the Closed-Loop Transfer Function From the
Specifications and the Fixed Parts of the System
The first step in the synthesis involves the determination of the
closed-loop transfer function of the sampled-data system from the
specifications and the fixed elements of the system. Although, in
general, specifications in control systems may take a wide variety
of forms, any but the most commonly used ones are difficult to
consider. Therefore, for the proposed synthesis procedure only the
following time domain specifications are imposed :
damping ratio of the control poles
overshoot
peak time
velocity error constant
The first three specify the transient response of the system, whereas
the last one defines the steady-state performance of the system to a
ramp input.
The basic model of the over-all system is shown by the block
diagram in Fig. 9-25. The system is characterized by two basic
components: the digital controller and the controlled process that
includes the fixed elements of the system. The closed-loop transfer
function of the system in Fig. 9-25 is given by
R(s)
E(s)
C(s)
D(s)
T
Gro(s)G₁(s)
Go(s)
Fixed elements
Digital Controller
Fig. 9-25 Simple sampled-data feedback control system with
digital compensation.

Sec. 9.5
311
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
M(z)
=
C(z)
R(z)
=
D(z) Gp(z)
1 + D(z)G,(z)
(9-82)
where G,(z) is the z-transform of Go(s) G₁(s) and is assumed to
be given at the outset of the synthesis.
In general, the selection of the desired closed-loop function M(z)
is governed by both the specifications and the nature of G,(x).
Evidently, the M(z) selected by the designer not only must satisfy
all the specifications but also should lead to a transfer function D(z)
for the digital controller which is physically realizable. It has been
shown in Sec. 9.2 that for D(z) to be physically realizable the
degree of the numerator in z must not exceed that of the denomi-
nator.
Solving for D(z) in Eq. (9-82) in terms of M(z) and G,(z)
yields
D(z) =
-
M(z)
1 − M(2) ^ G,(z)
X
G,(z)
(9-83)
If M(2) is written as the ratio of polynomials p(z)/q(z) and G,(z)
as n(z)/d(z), then Eq. (9-83) becomes
d(z)
X
p(z)
q(z) − p(z) ^n(z)
D(z)
=
q(z)
(9-84)
As the last equation demonstrates, to ensure that D(z) is a physically
realizable pulse transfer function (numerator order equals or is less
than the order of the denominator), the excess of poles over zeros
for M(z) must at least equal the excess of poles over zeros for
G,(z). For instance, if G,(z) has two finite poles and one finite
zero, an excess of poles over zero of one, the selected configuration
for M(z) must contain at least one more pole than zeros.
If a stable digital controller is desired, then the poles of D(z)
must lie inside the unit circle with the exception of a simple pole
at ≈ = 1. An unstable D(z) of course may still be realizable, but
if the synthesis can be accomplished with a stable digital controller,
certainly an unstable D(z) should be avoided because it will cor-
respond to an unstable open-loop system.
-
With reference to Eq. (9-84), we notice that the stability of
D(z) requires that the polynomial q(z) – p(z) have no zero on or
outside the unit circle with the exception of a possible simple zero
at z 1. Furthermore, if the fixed elements G,(z) has zeros outside
the unit circle, M(z) must contain the same zeros, or these zeros
will become the unstable poles of D(z).
=
The second factor governing the choice of M(z) is the set of
performance specifications. These specifications have been listed.
previously as the damping ratio, maximum overshoot, peak time,

312
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
and velocity error constant. The relationships between the pole-zero
configurations of the closed-loop transfer function of a second-order
sampled-data system and the maximum overshoot, damping ratio,
and peak time have been established in Sec. 6.7. Figures 6-20 and
6-21 give the percent overshoot and the peak time, respectively, in
terms of the locations of the closed-loop poles and zero of the second-
order system. Also, in Sec. 6-11 the relationships between the error
constants and the closed-loop pole-zero configurations were derived.
These relationships and the plots that were obtained previously are
basic and of great importance in regard to the synthesis procedure
proposed here.
The pole-zero configurations considered in detail in the following
discussion are all characterized by the fact that the principal charac-
teristics of the transient response of the system are fixed and
controlled by a pair of complex conjugate poles p₁ and p½ and a
real zero z₁ as shown in Fig. 9-26. All other poles are placed either
z-plane
Control poles
Control
zero
Z₁
·x+x·
P4 P3
22
22
Dipole
+1
P5
Unit circle
Fig. 9-26 Pole-zero configuration of M(z).
so close to the origin in the z-plane (such as p、 and p、) or so close
to a zero (as ps is close to z2) that they form a dipole and contrib-
ute insignificantly to the over-all transient response. With only the
basic control poles P1, P2, and the zero z₁, M(z) is of the form:
where
=
K(221)
R(z) (≈ — Þ₁)(z – P2)
M(z)
C(z)
=
-
K
(1 − p.)(1 − P₂)
-
(1 − ≈₁)
(9-85)
(9-86)
The constant K is so chosen that for a unit step function input the
steady-state error at the sampling instants is zero.
The closed-loop transfer function given by Eq. (9-85) can be
used only to synthesize a system with a G,(z) which has only one

Sec. 9.5
313
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
more pole than it has zeros. If the number of poles of G,(z) exceeds
the number of zeros by more than one, additional poles must be
inserted in M(z) to make D(z) physically realizable. By locating
these additional poles near the origin in the z-plane, their contrib
ution to the transient response can be made negligible.
Consider that M(z) is given by the basic structure of Eq. (9-85)
and that the pole-zero configuration of M(z) is illustrated in Fig.
9-27. Substitution of Eq. (9-85) into Eq. (9-83) yields
z-plane
ON
Ipi
καν
+1
Unit circle
D(z)
Fig. 9-27 Basic pole-zero configuration of M(z).
K(z-z1)
1
=
X
-
(≈ − p₁)(≈ − P₂) – K(z
-
21)
GALE
(9-87)
Since K is given by Eq. (9-86) and
P₁P₂ = |p|²
P₁ + P₂ = 2|p|cos &
P2
(9-88)
(9-89)
where p is the magnitude of p₁ (or p₂) and is the angle of pi
(see Fig. 9-27), we can show that D(z) can be written as
D(z)
=
1 - 2 pcos + | p |²
1 - 21
X
2-
-1) [≈
1) [ ≈ –
-
2-21
1
(9-90)
z₁(1 − 2|p|cos $) + |p|² ]}G,(z)
-
1.
-
21
If G,(z) has at least one more pole than it has zeros, then D(z)
is physically realizable. Furthermore, D(z) is stable if G,(z) has no
zero on or outside the unit circle and if the following condition is.
satisfied:
| ≈₁ (1 − 2 | p | cos p ) + | p |² | < 1
(9-91)
1- 21

314 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
40
N
30
20
15
10
5
2
1.5
1.0
=0.5
-=0.707
777
Unstable regions
0.5
C=0.707
= 0.5
0.2
0.15
0.1
0° 10° 20° 30° 40° 50° 60° 70° 80° 90°
φ
Fig. 9-28 Plots of the unstable regions of z₁ given by Eq. (9–91).
The condition of Eq. (9-91) is drawn in Fig. 9-28 for = 0.5 and
0.707 to facilitate the choice of z, and that will result in a stable
D(z). Note that D(z) is always stable if z, is negative. If G,(z)
contains a simple zero outside the unit circle, the closed-loop zero
z₁ should be chosen as this zero; and if this z, falls outside of the
unstable region of Fig. 9-28 for the specified values of and ø,
D(z) will be stable. However, if the value of z₁, chosen according
to the zero of G,(z) outside the unit circle, falls inside the unstable
region of Fig. 9-28, D(z) will be unstable. But in general there is
a certain amount of freedom available in the selection of and y,
so that z may still be located outside the unstable region by properly
choosing and .
The expression relating the velocity error constant to the closed-

Sec. 9.5
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 315
loop poles and zeros in the z-plane has been derived in Sec. 6.11
and is repeated below:
1
1
m
1
₁ = [È ----]
Ko
= T
i=1
Zi
(9-92)
where T is the sampling period, p, and z, are the closed-loop poles
and zeros, respectively. For the basic pole-zero configuration of Fig.
9-27, Eq. (9-92) is written
1
1
1
= T
Kv
—
+
Pi
-
1
-
P2 1 21
-
(9-93)
Substitution of Eqs. (9-88) and (9-89) into Eq. (9-93) yields
1
Kv
2. = T (
1
22 pcos
- 2 pcos + |p|² 1 21
(9-94)
An efficient method for increasing the velocity error constant
without affecting the transient response appreciably is to add a dipole
near 2 = +1. To increase K, the zero at z must be located to the
right of the pole at p in order that 1/(1 - p₁) may be less than
1/(1 − z₁). The zero and the pole are placed sufficiently close to
each other so that the residue of the function C(z)/z at the pole
P is neglible. With the insertion of the dipole, M(z) reads
-
M(z) =
C(z)
=
-
K(1 − p、)(z − 2₁)(≈ — 21)
R(z) (1 − z₁)(≈ — Þ1)(≈ — P2)(≈ − Pi)
The corresponding relation for K is
-
-
(9-95)
1
=T
Ko
1
-
2-2p cosp
2|p|cos & + |p|²
1
+
1
Pi
1
30
or
Kv
X = T [i
22p cosp
Zi
Pi
- 2 pcos + |p|²
1
-
21/1
-
1
1
-
21
Pi
--
--
1
1 Z1
-
1
21
(9-96)
(9-97)
The effects of the addition of the dipole near = 1 on the
transient response and the error coefficient K, will now be investi-
gated. For a unit step displacement input the residue of C(z)/z_at
the pole p is given by
1
kp. [₂ —— 1 M(2) × ( z − p.)
---
Substituting Eq. (9-95) into the last equation, we have
kp
-
--
-
-
-
(1 − p₁)(1 − P₂)(1 − Pi)(Þı — Z₁)(Pi — Zi)
-
-
-
―
(1 − z₁)(1 − zi)(pi − 1)(pi — Þ₁)(Pi — P2)
-
(9-98)
(9-99)
If p₁ and z, are much closer to the z = 1 point than the closed-loop

316 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
poles and zero are in the original configuration, the residue is
approximately
or
kp
=
Pi
P₁ - 21
1
-1 +
Zi
1 - Pi
1 Zi
(9-100)
(9-101)
If the added term resulting from the addition of the dipole is to
have an initial amplitude less than a certain percentage of the
magnitude of the step input, say 2 percent, kp, must be less than
0.02, or (1 p.)/(1 - 2) will lie between 1 and 1.02.
―
Thus the constraint given above and the desired value of K,
completely determine the values of z₁ and p₁. Meanwhile, the residues
at the original poles are only slightly modified by the addition of
the dipole, since (z — z₁)/(z — Þi) is essentially unity at the original
poles p₁ and P2.
As an illustrative example of the dipole method of increasing
Ko, consider that the z-transfer function of a closed-loop sampled-
data system is
C(z)
R(z)
=
0.822(≈ 0.1)
---
z² - 0.362 + 0.1
=
(9-102)
The sampling period is 0.1 second. The magnitude and angle of the
complex poles of C/R are p = 0.352 and 59.2 deg, respectively.
The velocity error constant of the original system, computed from
Eq. (9-94), is 9.6 sec¹. Let us assume that the velocity error constant
is to be increased to 20 by the addition of a dipole near ≈ = 1. The
added transient term resulting from the addition of the dipole is to
have an initial amplitude less than 5 percent. With the addition of
the dipole near z = 1, the resulting closed-loop transfer function is
written
C(z)
-
-
0.822(1 - p)(≈ 0.1)(x — Z₁)
R(z) (1 − 2)(2² -0.362 +0.1)(x — p₁)
-
(9-103)
For a unit step input the residue of C(z)/z at the pole p is approxi-
mately
kps
=
0.822 (−1+
1
--
Zi
(9-104)
If the transient step response is not to be affected by the dipole by
more than 5 percent, we set
1 Pi
= 1.05
1 Zi
Also, with the dipole K, is given by Eq. (9-97). Thus
(9-105)

Sec. 9.5
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 317
Kv
-
1
9.6
-
-
Zi Pi
1
0.1 (2₁ = 21) (1 p.)
For K, 20, Eq. (9-106) reads
=
Zi Pi
1
-
Zi
-
()() -0.54
1
Pi
(9-106)
(9-107)
Solving Eqs. (9-105) and (9-107) simultaneously, the pole and zero
positions are found to be
P₁ = 0.9028
Zi =
0.9074
(9-108)
(9-109)
The final pole-zero configuration is shown in Fig. 9-29, and the
closed-loop transfer function is
C(z)
R(2)
=
0.363(0.1)(x
0.9074)
(≈² − 0.36z + 0.1)( z − 0.9028)
z-plane
(9-110)
0.18+j0.31
0.9074
0.9028
0.18-j0.31
Unit circle
Fig. 9-29 Pole-zero configuration of C(z)/R(z) for example of
using dipole to increase K.
As an aid to the synthesis procedure, the first terms on the right
side of Eqs. (9-94) and (9-97) are plotted in Fig. 9-30 for = 0.5
and = 0.707.
Note that the method of increasing K. by adding a dipole near
z = 1 to the closed-loop transfer function is the well-known phase-
lag compensation. This correspondence is easily identified if we plot
the inverse root locus of the example given above. In Fig. 9-31 the
sketch of the inverse root locus of this example is based on the
pole-zero configuration in Fig. 9-29. The open-loop poles and zeros
are found on the inverse root locus plot. An integrating dipole is
located near ≈ = = 1 with the pole to the right of the zero.
An alternate method of increasing K, is to add a single zero to

318
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
9
8
6
2
5=0.707
= 0.5.
15°
30°
45° 60° 75°
90°
Fig. 9-30 Plot of
0.707.
2-21p cos
1 − 2|p| cos & + \p\²
versus for ( = 0.5 and
z-plane
Closed-loop
poles
Open-loop and
Open-loop
poles
Unit circle
closed-loop zeros
Fig. 9-31 Inverse root locus plot of the example of using dipole
to increase K,. The open-loop zero-pole configuration corresponds
to integral control.

Sec. 9.5
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 319
C(2)/R(z). As a matter of fact, the addition of a zero to C/R
corresponds to the phase-lead compensation discussed previously. For
instance, consider that in the preceding example of increasing Kʊ,
a zero is to be added at z = 22. In order to make D(z) physically
realizable, the addition of z must be accompanied by a pole p
located very near the origin. Thus the velocity error constants is
given by
1
1
-
1
= +
0.1
-
0.1
Kv 20 9.6 1- Ps 1 22
(9-111)
If p, is located very near the origin in the z-plane, the second term
on the right side of Eq. (9-111) is approximately 0.1. Eq. (9-111)
becomes
-
0.1
= 0.154
1
22
(9-112)
Solving for z, from the last equation yields
Z2 = 0.35
(9-113)
The pole-zero configuration of the final C(z)/R(z) is shown in Fig.
9-32a. The correspondence of this scheme of increasing K, with the
phase-lead compensation is clearly shown by the inverse root locus
plot of Fig. 9-32b.
The bandwidth of the closed-loop system is well known to increase
in the case of the phase-lead compensation, whereas the phase-lag
compensation usually decreases the bandwidth. The increase in band-
z-plane
z-plane
Pole very
near the
0.18+j0.31
origin
Closed-loop
poles
10.1 0.35
0.18-j0.31
(a)
Unit circle
Open-loop
poles
Unit circle
Open-loop and
closed-loop zeros
(b)
Fig. 9-32 (a) Pole-zero configuration of C(z)/R(z) for example
of using a simple pole to increase K. (b) Inverse root locus plot
of the example of using a simple zero to increase K. The open-
loop pole-zero configuration corresponds to derivative control.

320
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
width is particularly objectionable in sampled-data control systems,
since the passage of high frequency harmonics generated by the
sampler may cause hidden oscillations in the output response. Also,
because of the inherently low relative stability or instability of a
sampled-data system, a phase-lead compensation seldom gives satis-
factory compensation results. The addition of a simple zero to
C(z)/R(z) (accompanied by a pole near the origin) at any place
on the real axis other than the origin or near the origin has the
effect of causing larger overshoot in the step response and wider
bandwidth. The synthesis is complicated by the fact that the transient
response is no longer controlled just by the zero z, and the basic
control poles p, and p2. Therefore, with the addition of the zero the
design curves of Figs. 6-20 and 6-21, which are prepared on the
basis of the simple P1, P2, z, configuration, are no longer valid for
the prediction of the transient response and have to be modified.
In view of the reasons given above, the method of adding a zero
for increasing K, is not generally preferred in the synthesis of a
sampled-data control system. The dipole method is considered to be
more effective and straightforward.
Example of the Synthesis Method
The method of synthesis is now illustrated by the following
examples. The examples are chosen for the purpose of facilitating
the understanding of the basic elements of the design procedure.
Example 9-6
The fixed parts of a sampled-data system with zero-order hold is described
by the transfer function
-
Gp(s)
=
(1 e-Ts)
s² (s + 1)
(9-114)
The sampling period is 0.1 second.
Design a digital controller to realize the following specifications:
(a) = 0.707
(b) Tmax ≤0.3 sec.
(c) Overshoot ≤ 10 per cent.
(d) K, 5 sec-¹.
The selection of a suitable C(z)/R(z) is described by the following steps:
(1) The z-transfer function of the fixed parts of the system is given by
Gp(z) =
-
0.005(≈ 0.9)
(1)(≈
-
0.905)
(9-115)
Since G,(z) has one more pole than zero, the basic configuration of C(z)/R(≈)
given by Eq. (9-85) can be used. Therefore,

Sec. 9.5
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 321
C(2)
-
(1 - p)(1 P₂) (≈ — ≈1)
-
R(2)
(1 − z₁)(≈ — p₁) (≈ - £2)
-
(9-116)
and the condition of the physical realizability of the digital controller D(z)
is satisfied.
(2) Since the zero of G,(z) is located inside the unit circle, the zero z₁
can be chosen freely.
=
(3) As Fig. 6-20 shows for 0.707 and an overshoot of 10 percent,
the angle a must lie in the range between -80 deg and +18 deg, where
a is an angle determined by the pole-zero configuration of Eq. (9-116) and
is illustrated in Fig. 6-19.
max
=
0.3
(4) For a at the extremes of the range (−80° ≤ a≤ +18°) and T
sec, determine the corresponding range for using either Eq. (6-67) or Fig.
6-21, where is the angle of p₁.
Therefore, when a = - 80°,
and
Tmax /T 215°
=
0.1 x 215°
0.3
=
71°
When α = +18°,
Tmax /T: = 120°
and
0.1 × 120°
0.3
=
40°
(9-117)
(9-118)
(9-119)
(9-120)
(5) Selecting a = 0 deg from Fig. 6-21 or Eq. (6-76), we have
For Tmax
Tmax /T=
=
135°
0.3 sec, Eq. (9-121) gives > 45 deg.
(9-121)
In order that the bandwidth of the system may not be too high, the angle
should not be too large. Therefore, we choose = 50 deg. From Eq. (4-27),
p is determined as
I pl
=
-85
exp 57.3 √ 1 – 5²
= exp
2
- 50
57.3
-
0.42
(9-122)
=
0 deg, and p = 0.42, z₁ is found to be
equal to
For 50 deg, a
0.0737.
=
When the values of p, p, and z, are substituted into Eq. (9-49), the
velocity error constant is
which is satisfactory.
Κυ
-
8.2 sec-1
(9 123)
Based on the above design, the closed-loop transfer function of the syn-
thesized system is
C(2)
0.688(z 0.0737)
=
R() 22 0.54% +0.178
(9-124)
The pole-zero configuration of C(≈)/R(≈) is illustrated in Fig. 9-33.
(6) When the values of p, p, and z, are substituted into Eq. (9-90),
the transfer function of the digital controller is given by

322
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
p=0.42
α=0°
z-plane
0.27+j0.32
0.0737
1
0.27-j0.32
Unit circle
Hence
Fig. 9-33 Pole-zero configuration of the closed-loop transfer
function_C(z)/R(z) for the system designed in Example 9-6.
D(z) =
D(z)
=
0.688(≈ 0.0737)
-
1
X
1)(z 0.23 Gp(2)
-
138(z
0.0737) (z
(≈ − 0.23) (≈ ·
0.905)
0.9)
(9-125)
(9-126)
As we can see, D(z) is physically realizable and can be realized by any
one of the methods described in Sec. 9.2.
=
For a = O deg and 0.707, the maximum overshoot of the step response
of the system as predicted from Fig. 6-20 is 6.6 percent. The peak time,
computed from Fig. 6-21, is 0.27 sec. The actual step response of the system
at the sampling instants is determined by substituting R(z) = 2/(1 − 2) into
Eq. (9-124). Therefore,
C(z)
=
0.688≈ (z - 0.0737)
(≈ − 1)(≈² — 0.54≈ + 0.178)
Expanding the last equation by long division yields.
C(z)
-
= 0.6882-¹ + 1.0092-2 + 1.0582-3 +1.0272-4 + 2-5 + 0.992-6
+ . . .
(9-127)
(9-128)
The step response of the system at the sampling instants is plotted in Fig.
9-34. Note that c(nT)max is equal to 1.058 at nT = 0.3 sec, and corresponds
to a maximum overshoot of 5.8 percent and a peak time of 0.3 sec. We
should not expect that the z-transform solution would give the exact maximum
overshoot and peak time of the continuous output. However, in this case the
z-transform solutions are quite close to the actual quantities.
The following tabulation gives a comparison of the results and the specified
quantities:
ૐ
Tmax
Overshoot
Kv
Specified
Designed
0.707
0.707
<0.3 sec
<10%
≥ 5
0.27 sec
6.6%
8.2

Sec. 9.5
323
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
1.095
1.058
|
Step response of system
designed in Ex.9-6 (Kv=5)
Step response of system
with dipole compensation
in Ex.9-7 (Kv = 20)
O
O.I
0.2
0.3 0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Fig. 9-34 Step responses of systems designed in Examples 9-6
and 9-7.
Example 9-7
Consider that the same G,(z) and the same specifications of the last
example are used except that the bandwidth of the system is to be kept
approximately the same as the previous system and K, is increased to 20 sec¯¹.
In order to increase K, without appreciably affecting the bandwidth, a
dipole may be added near z = +1 to the closed-loop transfer function C(z)/
R(z) selected for the last example. The final system function is now
C(z)
R(2)
-
0.688(1 - p) (≈ — 0.0737) (≈ — 2₁)
(1 − ≈¿)(≈² — 0.54z + 0.178)(≈ Pi)
(9-129)
Since the maximum overshoot is specified as less than 10 percent and since
the basic pole-zero configuration of C/R without the dipole corresponds to a
system with an overshoot of 6.6 percent, the added transient term must, as
a result of the addition of the dipole, have an amplitude less than 3 percent.
Thus we set
1
Pi
= 1.03
1
Zi
(9-130)
1
1
From Eq. (9-97) the velocity error constant is written
1
1
-
Pi
-0.1
K₂ 20 8.2
Solving Eqs. (9-130) and (9-131) simultaneously yields
Zi
(( ~ + 1 ) ( p )
(1
(9-131)
Pi
Z₁ =
= 0.9595
(9-132)
and
Pi
=
0.9583
(9-133)

324
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
The final system transfer function is
C(z)
R(2)
****
--
0.9595)
0.7086(z - 0.0737) (z
(≈² − 0.54≈ + 0.178)(z — 0.9583)
(9-134)
For a unit step function input C(z) is expanded into a power series by long
division.
3
C(z) = 0.70862-1 + 1.04x‍² + 1.095≈-³ + 1.06≈¯ + 1.02z-5
+0.99%-6 +0.96≈7 + 0.93z-8 +
(9-135)
The step response of the system at the sampling instants is now plotted
in Fig. 9-34. Note that the peak time is approximately 0.3 sec and that
the maximum overshoot is 9.5 percent. All these quantities satisfy the
specifications.
By substituting Eq. (9-134) into Eq. (9-83), we obtain the transfer function
of the digital controller.
D(z) =
142(≈ — 0.0737) (≈ − 0.96) (≈ — 0.905)
(≈ + 0.983)(≈ + 0.223) (≈ − 0.9)
Clearly D(z) is stable and physically realizable.
(9-136)
The system designed in this example has a velocity constant four times
greater than that of the system designed in the previous example. When
the step responses of the two systems are compared, the overshoot of the
dipole compensated system has only about 3 percent higher overshoot. How-
ever, the transient response of the dipole compensated system contains a long
tail of small amplitude. This long-duration tail is anticipated in all systems
with integral compensation, since the added transient term due to the dipole
has a time constant of 1/pt, which is long compared to the original time
constants of the system.
In this section, an attempt has been made to present an extension
of Truxal's synthesis method of the continuous-data systems to the
synthesis of sampled-data systems. The synthesis procedure is aimed
toward reducing the complexity of the problem to the point where
the dynamic characteristics of the system can be described by two
control poles and one zero in the z-plane. The synthesis procedure
essentially involves a selection of these control poles and zero to
meet the performance specifications and a physically realizable digital
compensator. The compensator need not be stable, although stability
is preferable. Additional poles may be added to C(z)/R(2) near the
origin of the z-plane if the fixed part of the system has an excess
of poles over zeros of more than one. However, the realizability of
D(z) in sampled-data systems is not nearly as critical as in the
continuous-data case, since a third order continuous-data plant with
hold, say
Gp(s)
=
(1 e-Ts)
s(s+1)(s+ 2)
(9-137)

Sec. 9.6
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 325
corresponds to a z-transfer function G,(z) with three poles and
two zeros, producing an excess of poles over zeros of only one. A
dipole may be added near z = +1 in the z-plane to increase the
velocity error constant without appreciably affecting the bandwidth
and the transient overshoot of the designed system.
9.6 DESIGN OF SAMPLED DATA SYSTEMS WITH
"MINIMAL" OR "DEADBEAT" RESPONSES+
In the preceding sections the design and synthesis of sampled-
data control systems have relied to a great extent on the extension
of the techniques of synthesis and design of continuous-data control
systems. The criteria for the frequency-domain design of sampled-
data control systems are generally expressed in the form of the
phase and gain margins, resonant peak, and bandwidth. The design
may be viewed as the shaping of the frequency locus of the system
to obtain satisfactory relative stability. In the synthesis of sampled-
data systems, the criteria of performance are expressed in the form
of time domain specifications, such as the overshoot, peak time, and
damping ratio.
Because of the flexibility in the application and realizability of
a digital controller, a sampled-data system can be designed with
minimum settling time and zero steady-state error at the sampling
instants when a specific test signal such as a step, ramp, or parabolic
is applied. With reference to the system configuration of Fig. 9-35,
R(z)
E(z)
D(s)
Gro(s)
C(s)
G₁(s)
D(z)
Gp (z)
Fig. 9-35 Single-loop sampled-data feedback control system.
a physically realizable digital controller D(z) can be designed so
that for a particular test input the outputs at the sampling instants
are as specified. In essence the design criteria are as follows:
(1) The system must have zero steady-state error at the sampling
instants for the specified input test signal.
(2) The rise time should equal a minimum number of sampling
periods.
(3) The settling time, measured at the sampling instants, should
be finite.
† J. E. Bertram, “Factors in the Design of Digital Controllers for Sampled-data
Feedback Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., vol. 75, Part 2, July 1956, pp. 151–159.

326 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
(4) D(z), G,(z), and C(z)/R(z) must all be physically realizable.
A response that satisfies all these properties is referred to as a
"minimal" or "deadbeat" response.
The design of the "minimal" response system in a sense has the
same philosophy as the synthesis method described in the preceding
section. The design procedure starts with the selection of an over-
all system function M(z) meeting the specifications of minimum
rise time, finite settling time, and zero steady-state error and simul-
taneously resulting in a physically realizable controller. To obtain
such complete control over the transient behavior of the system
requires specification of both the zeros and poles of the over-all
system function M(2). However, in view of the four design criteria
listed above and of the selection of the over-all minimal response
function, M(z) for a given input signal is likely to have restrictions.
These restrictions are found by considering the criteria and realiza-
bility conditions in the following:
Steady-State Error and Finite Settling Time
As has been shown previously, the transfer function of the digital
controller in the system of Fig. 9-35 is given by
D(x) =
M(2)
X
1- M(2) G,(z)
(9-138)
where M(z) denotes the over-all system function C(z)/R(z). We
shall show that in order to obtain zero steady-state error in response
to test signals of the form r(t) = t™, constraints must be imposed
on the function 1 M(z) which appears in the denominator of
D(z). The z-transform of the error signal of the system is written
as
-
E(x) = R(x)[1 − M(2)]
(9-139)
Applying the final-value theorem to the last equation, the steady-
state error is given by
lim e(nT) = lim (1 − ≈¯¹)R(≈)[1 − M(x)]
N-00
2=1
(9-140)
If one of the requirements is that the steady-state error be zero,
we equate Eq. (9-140) to zero.
lim e(nT) = lim (1 − z¯¹)R(z)[1 − M(2)] = 0
n→00
z=1
(9-141)
From the z-transform table, we see that for the type of input
considered (tm), the z-transform is of the form
R(2)
=
A(z)
(1 - 2¹)"
(9-142)

Sec. 9.6
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 327
-1
where n = m + 1 and that A(z) is a polynomial in z¹ with no zeros
at z = 1. Substitution of Eq. (9-142) into Eq. (9-141) yields
lim e(nT) lim (1
=
7000
(1
72
z-¹) A(2) [1-M(x)]=0 (9-143)
2=1
-
-
Since A(z) does not have zeros at z = 1, the necessary condition.
for the steady-state error to be zero in Eq. (9-143) is that 1 M(x)
contain the factor (1 − z¯¹)" which will cancel the same factor in
the denominator. Thus 1 - M(z) must have the form
-
1 M(x) = (1 − z¯¹)"F(z)
-
1
(9-144)
where F(z) is a polynomial (to be chosen) in z¹ with no zeros at
z = 1. Solving for M(z) in Eq. (9-144), we have
or
−
M(z) 1 (1 − z¯¹)"F(z)
=
M(z)
=
-
—
2" (z1)"F(z)
Z"
(9-145)
(9-146)
Since F(z) is assumed to be a polynomial in z', it has only poles
at z = 0. Note that the characteristic equation of the system with
zero steady-state error is of the form
ZP = 0
(9-147)+
where p is an integer greater or equal to n. Therefore, in order to
have the steady-state error die out within a finite time interval when
the input signal is t", the characteristic equation of the system
should have the form described by Eq. (9-147).
Physical Realizability Considerations
The limitations which are imposed on the forms of G,(z) and
D(z) by their physical realizability also restrict the selection of
the over-all system function M(z). In general, physically realizable
D(z) and G,(z) can be expressed by the following expressions:
D(z) = dnz" + dn+12="~¹ +
-n-k
·
(9-148)
and
Gp(z)
= gpZ˜³ +
Ep+12˜P−1 +
+
8p+kZ˜P−k
+
(9-149)
where n ≥ 0 and p≥0. Substituting the last two equations into
the closed-loop transfer function M(z) yields
In general F(z) need not be a polynomial; it can be a rational function in 2-1
as long as it has no poles or zeros at z = 1, and no poles outside the unit circle. Then,
the characteristic equation of the system with zero steady-state error is of the form
z³Fa(z) = 0, where Fa(z) denotes the denominator polynomial of F(z).

328 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
M(z)
=
=
C(z)
R(z)
(dnz" + dn+12¯”-¹ + . . .)(gp≈¯”+ gp+12˜P−¹ +
1+(dnz" + dn+12="¹ + . . .) (gp²¯” + gp+12˜P−¹ +
-p-1
.)
(9-150)
M(z) can be expanded into a power series in z¯¹. Therefore,
M(2) = Mm²¯ + Mm+12¯” +
where m = n + p.
-m-1
·
(9-151)
The above discussion simply verifies that if G,(z) and D(z) are
physically realizable, the over-all system function is also physically
realizable. More important, Eq. (9-151) indicates that to ensure that
gher
D(z) is physically realizable, the lowest power of the series expansion
of M(z) in z must be at least as large as the lowest power in z¹
in the series expansion of G,(z). Comparing Eq. (9-151) with Eq.
(9-145), we note that the selection of F(z) is not entirely arbitrary.
In order that the system may have a deadbeat response and simul-
taneously result in a physically realizable D(z), F(z) should be so
chosen that M(z) does not contain the constant term 1; this means
that F(z) should contain the constant term 1.
As an illustration, consider that the controlled process of the
sampled-data system of Fig. 9-35 is described by the z-transfer
function
G,(z) = 1 - - - - - })
-
(9-152)
Note that the impulse sequence of the controlled process given by
the last equation has a time lag equal to two sampling instants.
Let us assume that a digital controller is to be designed so that
the step response of the system is of the minimal type.
For a unit step input, R(z) = 1/(1 - 2'); the function 1 - M(2)
must have the form
•
----
-
1 M(z) = (1 − x¯¹) F(x)
(9-153)
However, we shall show that the fastest response that can be
obtained from this system is a step response which settles to zero
steady-state error in two sampling periods. The fastest step response
that can be obtained from this system is when
M(z) = x
2
(9-154)
since the highest power in z¹ of the series expansion of M(z)
should be greater or equal to the highest power in z¹ of the series
expansion of G,(z). We shall show that selection M(z) = z¯¹ as
the over-all system function will result in a digital controller that

Sec. 9.6
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLER 329
1
is physically unrealizable. Substitution of M(z) = 2¹ and Eq. (9-152)
into Eq. (9-138) yields
D(z) =
Z-1
1
- 1
2
z
1
2
-
X
2
=
1
-
z
2-2
- 2
(9-155)
which evidently is not a physically realizable pulse transfer function.
For M(z) = 22, the transfer function of the digital controller is
D(z)
-
1
2
-
z
1
2
(9-156)
which is realizable.
In this case, the function F(z) is given by
F(z) =
1 - M(z)
1
-
-
1 + z¹
1
(9-157)
Therefore, the restriction on the selection of F(z) when G,(z) has
a time lag has been demonstrated by this example. In general, we
can show that if G,(z) has either time lag or zeros on or outside
the unit circle, F(z) cannot be chosen arbitrarily. The case when
G,(z) has zeros on or outside the circle will be discussed later.
The example just given also illustrated the constraints imposed
on the possible form of M(z) when G,(z) has a time lag. However,
as will be shown in the following paragraphs, G,(z) has poles on
or outside the unit circle, additional restriction on M(z) is imposed
Input function
TABLE 9-2
r(t)
Step u(t)
-
Ramp t
R(z)
1 - M(z)
1
2
(1 − x-¹) F(x)
---
Tz-1
(1 − x-1)2
(1 − z−¹)²F(z)
Parabolic t2
-
(1 − x-¹)³F(z)
T²z-1(1+x-1)
(1 − 2−1)3
-
-
in that M(z) should also contain these unstable poles of G„(z).
Tabulated in Table 9-2 are the expressions of 1 M(2) neces-
sary for a sampled-data system to have a minimal type of output in
response to a step, ramp, and parabolic input.
=
If the controlled process G,(z) has no time lag and all its zeros
are inside the unit circle, then F(z) can be chosen to be unity. With
F(s) 1, from. Table 9-2, the over-all system functions of systems
with minimal outputs in response to step, ramp, and parabolic inputs
are determined and given as follows:

330
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Step input
Ramp input
M(x) = z¯¹
1
2
(9-158)
M(z)
= 22-1
2
-
(9-159)
M(z) = 3x1-3x² + 2-3
2
(9-160)
Parabolic input
Note that when the system is designed to yield a minimal response
at the application of a step input, the transient settles in one sampling
period. When the system is designed on the basis of a ramp input,
the transient settles in two sampling periods, and so on. In general,
for an input of the form t, the minimum settling time of minimal
response system is m + 1 sampling periods.
The following example illustrates the design of a sampled-data
system with minimal response.
Example 9-8
Consider that the controlled process, including the hold device, of the
system of Fig. 9-35 is described by
Gp(s)
=
-
e-Ts
1
s² (s + 1)
(9-161)
The sampling period is 0.1 second. Design a digital controller so that the
system has a minimal response at the sampling instants when the input is a
unit step function. The transfer function of the system is purposely chosen
to be the same as that of the system in Example 9-7 so that the techniques
and philosophies of the present minimal design may be compared with the
synthesis method presented in Sec. 9.5
The z-transform of G₂(s) is
Gp(2)
-
0.0052-¹(1
(1 − 2-¹)(1
0.92-1)
0.9052-¹)
(9-162)
Since G,(z) does not have a time lag and since all its zeros are inside the
unit circle in the z-plane, F(z) is chosen to be 1. From Table 9-2,
hence
1 – M(z) = 1 - z-¹
M(z)
= 2-1
For a unit step input, the z-transform of the system output is
C(z) =
2-1
1
=c-1 + ¢72 + སྱཱ +
3
·
The step response at the sampling instants is shown in Fig. 9-36.
c(nT)
r(t) = u(1)
1
0.1
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Fig. 9-36 Output response at the sampling instants of the sampled-
data system designed in Example 9-8.
(9-163)
(9-164)
(9-165)

Sec. 9.6
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 331
Substitution of M(z) and G,(z) into Eq. (9-138) yields
D(2)
= 200 (1=
0.9052-1
0.92-1
(9-166)
which is physically realizable.
In the compensated system although the transient response settles to zero
error in one sampling period in response to a step input, the performance
of the system must be investigated when inputs other than a unit step are
applied. Using Eq. (9-139), the error transform for a unit ramp input is
written
E(z) = R(z)[1 − M(≈)]
=
0.12-1
(1 − 2−1) 2 (1 − 2−¹)
Hence
E(z)
0.12-1
=
=
1
0.1(x1+x
-
(9-167)
+ + .)
·
·
(9-168)
Step input
r(t)
c(nT)
Step input
r(t) c(nt)
Step input
C(NT) r(1)
OT 27 4T 6T
OT 2T 4T 6T
от 27 4T 6T
_e(nT)
e(nT)
e(nT)
T 2T 3T
27
37
(a)
(b)
-2-
(c)
Ramp input
5r
5r
Ramp input
Ramp input
4 r(1).
4-
(10)༅། ༼y()J
c(nT)
3 C(NT)
от 27 4T 6T
от 27 4T
6T
от 27 47 67
e(nT)
to
e(nT)
Le(nT)
от 27 4T 6T
от 27
37
(d)
(e)
(f)
r(t)
Parabolic
input
8 r(1)
Parabolic
input
Parabolic
8 r(t) input
6-
4
c(nT)
c(nT)
2F
от 27 4T
6T
от 27 47 67
от 27 4T
67
6t e(nT)
6t
e(nT)
e(nT)
라
​2
2
от 27 4T 6T
от 27
4T 67
07 27 37
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 9-37

332 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
The steady-state error is not zero when a ramp input is applied to the system
designed to yield a minimal output in response to a step input. Similarly,
for a unit parabolic input t2 the error transform is
·
·
E(z) — 0.01(≈¯¹ + 3≈−² + 5≈−³ + 72-4 +92-5 + .)
Evidently, the magnitude of the error sequence increases with time.
(9-169)
Referring to the computations above, we may conclude that the
designed system has a minimal response at the sampling instants
only when the input is a step function. When the system is subjected
to an input other than a step function, the response is not only
not minimal but is not acceptable by any standards. This char-
acteristic, however, is typical of the minimal response design. The
designed system may be said to be "tuned" for a particular test signal,
and it does not respond satisfactorily to any other type of input.
Figure 9-37 illustrates the responses of the minimal response
systems designed on the basis of the step, ramp, and acceleration
inputs. In each case the effect of having only minimal response for
a particular input is clearly shown. For instance, Fig. 9-37b shows
that the step response of a system which is designed to have a
minimal response to a ramp input has an overshoot of 100 percent.
Comments on the Minimal Response Design
Both the minimal response design and the z-plane synthesis
method rely heavily on the cancellation of the undesirable poles
and zeros of G,(z). In this respect the philosophies of the two
methods are quite similar. In the design for minimal response D(z)
is selected with poles and zeros cancelling the unwanted poles and
zeros of G,(z) so that all the poles of the over-all system function
lie at the origin in the z-plane. In the synthesis method described
in Sec. 9.5, D(2) is designed to cancel the undesirable poles and
zeros of G,(z), and at the same time, poles and zeros of D(z) are
inserted at more appropriate places so that the over-all system
satisfies the specified performance criteria.
Since the minimal design can result in a system whose output
follows the input exactly after a minimum number of sampling
periods with no overshoot and since the design procedure is straight-
forward, the minimal design would, at first glance, seem to be a far
superior method than the z-plane synthesis and any of the other
methods described previously. However, the minimal response design
has at least the following disadvantages:
(1) The design refers to the response at only the sampling

Sec. 9.6
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 333
instants. A minimal response at the sampling instants does not
necessarily assure a minimal response at all times.
(2) The design is optimum only for the specific input for which
it is intended. The designed system does not provide satisfactory
performance to other inputs.
(3) From the point of view of sensitivity, the multiple order pole
of the closed-loop transfer function at the origin (or at any other
point in the z-plane) is undesirable. It will be shown that the
sensitivity of the multiple order pole due to a change in any system
parameter k is infinite.t
The sensitivity of the roots of the characteristic equation of a
sampled-data system with respect to the incremental change of a
system parameter k is defined as
Si
=
k
dz z dz
dk/k dk z
=
X
(9-170)
Assuming that the characteristic equation is a polynomial with
constant coefficient, we can write it as
P(z) + kQ(z)
=
0
(9-171)
where k is a system parameter, such as the open-loop gain, P(z)
and Q(z) are polynomials which do not contain k. Consider that k
is varied by an increment Ak. Eq. (9-171) becomes
P(z) + (k + Ak)Q(z) = 0
Dividing both sides of Eq. (9-172) by P(z) + kQ(z) yields
(9-172)
1 +
AkQ(z)
P(z) + kQ(z)
=
0
which can be written as
(9-173)
where
1 + AkB(z) = 0
B(z)
=
Q(z)
P(z)+kQ(z)
(9-174)
(9-175)
Notice that the denominator of B(z) contains the original char-
acteristic equation. Expanding B(2) by partial fraction expansion, in
the neighborhood of a characteristic equation root z of multiplicity
n, B(z) is approximated by
† G. Franklin, discussion of paper by S. F. Schmidt, “Application of Continuous
System Design Concepts to the Design of Sampled-data Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E.,
Part 2 May 1959, pp. 78-79.
J. G. Truxal, I. M. Horowitz, “Sensitivity Considerations in Active Network Syn-
thesis," Proceedings of the Second Midwest Symposium on Circuit Theory, East
Lansing, Mich., December 1956. F. F. Kuo, “Pole-zero Sensitivity in Network Functions,"
I. R. E., Transactions on Circuit Theory, Vol. CT-5, December 1958, pp. 372-373.

334 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
B(x)
=
A₁
(2-21)"
-
Ai
(Az)"
Substitution of Eq. (9-176) into Eq. (9-174) yields
1 +
Ak A
(Az)"
=
0
from which, we obtain
(9-176)
(9-177)
Ak - (Az)"− ¹
=
Az
A₁
(9-178)
Taking the limit on both sides of Eq. (9-178) as ▲k and Az approach
zero, we have
lim (Ak) = dk
-(Az)"-1
= lim
Ak-0 A₁
= 0
Az-0
Ak-0
Az→0
(9-179)
Thus at a multiple order root of the characteristic equation, either
dk/dz = 0 or S is infinite. In other words, the minimal response
design which places all poles of C(z) R/(z) at the origin of the
z-plane has the system operating at a point of infinite sensitivity
of pole position to parameter variations. Furthermore, Eq. (9-179)
shows that the larger the number of poles placed at a single point,
the more sensitive will be the pole locations to parameter changes.
The derivations given above simply show that a minimal response
is extremely sensitive to parameter changes in practical systems.
Therefore, in the design of any system, if consideration is placed
on the sensitivity of response to parameter changes, the use of the
minimal response design must be precluded.
Design of Systems with Plant Poles and Zeros Outside the Unit Circle
We know that the minimal response design of sampled-data control
systems is achieved through cancellation of the undesired poles and
zeros of the transfer function of the controlled process G,(z).
Unfortunately, because of parameter variations and inaccuracy in
the description of a physical system by a transfer function, perfect
cancellation of poles and zeros are impossible in any practical system.
It has been shown previously that an imperfect cancellation of
either a zero or a pole of G,(z) outside the unit circle by the pole
and zero of D(z) may lead to a system which is unstable. For this
reason the design procedures discussed previously have been limited
† R. H. Barker, "The Theory of Pulse-Monitored Servo and Their use for Predic-
tion," Report No. 1046, Signals Research and Development Establishment, Christchurch,
England, Nov. 1950.

Sec. 9.6
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 335
to only those systems with G,(z) which have poles and zeros inside
the unit circle. For a system with a G,(z) that has poles and zeros
outside the unit circle, a separate treatment is necessary.
Let us first illustrate the effect of imperfect cancellation of poles
and zeros of G,(z) that lie outside the unit circle.
Consider that the controlled process is described by
-
Zo
G,(z) = (x — ž。 ) A,(z)
-
Ро
(9-180)
where z, is a zero and p, a pole on or outside the unit circle in
the z-plane; A,(z) represents a rational function with all poles and
zeros inside the unit circle. Assuming that a digital controller is
designed with poles and zeros that will cancel the zero z, and pole
P. of G,(z) and some poles and zeros of A,(z), D(z) is given by
D(z) = ( 2 — Za) Ad(2)
Z
-
(9-181)
where za and pa are the zero and pole which are to cancel p, and
z,, respectively. Substitution of Eqs. (9-180) and (9-181) into the
over-all system function yields
M(x) =
D(z)G,(z)
1+D(z)G(2)
=
Zd
--
()()
Pa
-
Zd
-
-
A.(2) Ac (2)
1 + (2 − 24 ) ( 2 − 2; ) A.(2) Aa(2)
-
·
The characteristic equation of the system is
-
-
2 Po
(z — Þa)(z – Po) + (z − Za)(≈ — z,)A,(z) Aa(z) = 0 (9-183)
Let us assume that imperfect cancellation occurs between z, and pɑ,
so that
but Po
20 = pa + Az,
=za. Substituting Eq. (9-184) into Eq. (9-183) yields
-
-
(9-184)
(z - Pa)(z - Po) + (x − Za) (≈ — Þa – Az.)A,(z) Aa(z) = 0
(z
(9-185)
Collecting terms and dividing through the last equation by the terms
that do not contain Az,, we have
1+
-
−Az,A,(2)Ad(z)(z → za)
(z
--
(≈ − Þa)(≈ — Þo) + (≈ − Za) (≈ − Þa)A,(z) Aa(z)
-
-
Since poza, Eq. (9-186) is simplified to
1 +
-Az,A,(z) Aa(z)
d
(≈ − Pa)[1 + A,(z) Aa(z)]
=
0
(9-186)
(Az, 0)
= 0 (Az, 0) (9-187)
The zeros of the last cquation are the roots of the characteristic

336 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
equation. Using the root locus theory we can see that, if Az, is
considered as the variable parameter, one of the root loci of the
characteristic equation starts at z = pa which is located outside the
unit circle. Therefore, for small values of Az,, the root will be
very close to Pa, and the closed-loop system is unstable.
If imperfect cancellation exists between p, and za as well as
between pa and z,, we let
Po = za + AP.
(9-188)
In addition to the relationship of Eq. (9-184). Substituting Eq.
(9-188) into Eq. (9-185) yields
-
-
-
(z - Pa)(z - Za – Apo) + (z — Za)(≈ — pa — ▲z,)A,(z) Aa(z) = 0
(9-189)
By rearranging the terms, and then dividing through both sides of
Eq. (9-189) by the terms which do not contain Ap,, we have
−▲po(z — Þa)
-
1 +
(x − ze)(1 +
-A2,A,(2) Ad(2)
—
≈ − Þa)[1 + A,(z) Aɑ(2)]
=
0
(9-190)
-
The zeros of the last equation are the roots of the characteristic
equation when imperfect cancellations of the pole p, and the zero
z, of G,(z) are made by the pole and zero of D(z). Observe also
that the denominator of the second term on the left side of Eq.
(9-190) is identical to the left side of Eq. (9-187) times (z – za).
Therefore, when ▲p, is considered a variable parameter, one of the
root loci of Eq. (9-190) starts on the root locus of Eq. (9-187)
which begins at z = P., and one locus starts at z = za. Since both
Ap, and Az, are assumed to be small, the two roots of Eq. (9–190)
on the two root loci starting at z, and p, are located very close to
the starting points, and the system is unstable. Of course, if z, and
Po are located outside but very close to, or on the unit circle,
imperfect cancellation of z, and p, may result in a system which is
conditionally stable. On the other hand, if z, and p, are located
just inside the unit circle, imperfect cancellation of the pole and
zero may still lead to an unstable system.
The conclusion drawn from this discussion is that if a controlled
system of a sampled-data control system has a pulse transfer function
which contains zeros and poles which lie on or outside the unit
circle in the z-plane, no attempt is to be made to cancel these poles
and zeros with the poles and zeros of a digital controller, since
imperfect cancellations may cause the system to be unstable. This
simply imposes additional constraints on the selection of the over-
all system transfer function for the minimal response design. Rewrit-
ing Eq. (9-138) yields

Sec. 9.6
337
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
D(z)
-
-
M(z)
1 − M(z) ^Gp(z)
1
X
(9-191)
If G,(z) has poles and zeros that lie on or outside the unit circle
in the z-plane, Eq. (9-191) can be written as
M(2)
–
II (1 - piz¯¹)
i
1
D(z)
=
1 − M(2) * II (1
X
(9-192)
―
212-¹)
A,(z)
where p and z represent the poles and zeros, respectively, of G,(z)
that lie on or outside the unit circle. A,(z) is a rational function
in z¹ with poles and zeros only inside the unit circle. Since D(z)
is not allowed to contain the poles p₁ and the zeros z, with reference
to Eq. (9-192), we see that these poles and zeros of G,(z) must be
cancelled by the poles and zeros of M(z) and 1 – M(z).
-
For a response with finite settling time, M(2) and 1 - M(z) are
polynomials in z¹. Therefore, to prevent D(z) from containing the
poles and zeros of G,(z) that are on or outside the unit circle,
M(z) must contain the terms II (1 − ≈≈¯¹) and 1 – M(z) must
—
–
í
―
contain IĮ (1 − piz¯¹). In general, M(z) and 1 – M(z) have the
1
following forms:
M(≈) = ȚI (1
!!
---
212-¹)(MmZ¯ + Mm+12¯m-1 + . . .) (9-193)
where m should equal or be greater than the lowest power in z¹
in the series expansion of G,(z).
1 - M(2)
=
1
2
II (1 − piz¯¹)(1 − z¯¹)”(1 + a₁z¯¹ + a½ï¯² + .)
i
(9-194)
where n is an integer which depends on the order of the input test
signal. Note that if some of the poles of G,(z) are at z =
-
1, then
1 – M(z) is raised to the power of (121) equal to either the
order of the input signal poles or the order of the poles of G,(z)
at z 1, whichever is higher.
=
1
To illustrate the design of a system which has poles and zeros
of G,(z) outside or on the unit circle, the following numerical
example is given.
Example 9-9
For the system of Fig. 9-35, the transfer function of the controlled process
is given by
1
-T's
e
Gp(s) = Gro(s) G₁(s)
=
s³(1+0.04s)
The sampling period is 0.05 second.
(9-195)
The problem is to design a digital controller that will produce an output

338
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
with zero steady-state error and minimum finite settling time in response to
a ramp input. The z-transform of G,(s) is
G,(z)
=
3.92 × 10-¹¹(1 + 2.78≈¯¹)(1 + 0.2z−¹)
(1 − ≈¯¹)²(1 − 0.286≈¯¹)
(9-196)
which has one zero outside the unit circle at z = - 2.78 and two poles on the
unit circle at z = +1.
In order to obtain a response with finite settling time, M(2) must be a
polynomial in 2-¹ and should contain the zero of G,(z) at z = − 2.78. Thus
M(z) is of the form
M(z) = (1 + 2.782-1) (M₁z-¹ + M₂z¯2)
(9-197)
The lowest order of M(z) in z¹ is unity, since the lowest order in z¹ in
the series expansion of G,(z) is unity. For a unit ramp input, 1 — M(z)
should contain a factor (1-2-1) and also the poles of G,(z) that are on
or outside the unit circle. In this case, since G,(z) has two poles at z = +1,
having the term (1-1)2 in 1 – M(z) would be sufficient to satisfy both
requirements. Hence 1 M(2) is of the form.
1 M(z) =
==
―
(1 − ≈¯¹)² F(≈) = (1 − ≈¯¹)²(1 + a₁z¯¹)
-
where in order for the
-
-
-
(9-198)
response to be deadbeat and simultaneously result in
a physically realizable D(z), 1 – M(z) must contain the constant term 1.
Note that M(z) in Eq. (9-197) is chosen to be a polynomial in z¹ of order
three, which means that the transient response will settle in three sampling
periods, the shortest possible settling time for this system. Referring to Eq.
(9-159), we see that if G,(z) does not have poles or zeros on or outside the
unit circle, the minimum settling time for a ramp input is two sampling
periods. Because of the zero of G,(z) at z = −2.78, F(z) = 1 can no longer
be chosen. Hence the settling time is increased by one sampling period. In
general, the more zeros and poles of G,(z) which lie outside the unit circle,
the longer will be the finite settling time.
Now, with three unknowns and three independent equations, M₁, M₂, and
a can be solved from Eq. (9-197) and Eq. (9-198). Substitution of Eq.
(9-197) into Eq. (9-198) yields the following equations:
1
-3
M₁≈¯¹ + (2.78M₁ + M½)≈¯² + 2.78M½≈¯³ = (2 − a₁)≈¯¹
+ (2a₁
-
1)2¯2 — ac"3
-
1
(9-199)
Equating the coefficients of the corresponding terms of both sides of the last
equation, we have
M₁ = 2 - a₁
(9-200)
2.78M,+M₂ = 2a₁ - 1
(9-201)
2.78M2 -ai
(9-202)
Solving the last three equations yields the coefficients
M₁ = 0.723
(9-203)
M2
a₁ =
-0.46
1.277
(9-204)
(9-205)

Sec. 9.6
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 339
Hence, the over-all system transfer function is
M(z) = 0.7232-¹ + 1.5542-2
1.2772-3
For a unit ramp input, the z-transform of the output is
(9-206)
C(z) = M(z)
Tz-1
(1-2-1)
=
0.05 (0.7232-2 + 32-3 + 4≈4 + 52-5 +
.)
(9-207)
The output response at the sampling instants is shown in Fig. 9-38a. When
a unit step input is applied, the output z-transform is
1
-
C(z) = M(~) (1 − x−¹)
=
0.723x+2.2772-2 + 2-3 + 2-4 +
(9-208)
2
우후​후
​8-
7-
6H
5-
r(t)
2
2.277
c(nT)
27 37
4T
57 6T
ז7
Time (7 0.05 sec)
(a)
r(1)
c(nT)
27 3T 4T 5T 6T
ז7
Time (T=0.05 sec)
(b)
8T 97
IOT
8T 97 IOT
Fig. 9-38 Ramp and step responses of the system in Example
9-9. (a) Ramp response. (b) Step response.

340
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
The step response of the system has an overshoot of over 100 percent. (Fig.
9-38b).
Substitution of Eqs. (9-206) and (9-196) into Eq. (9-191) yields the
pulse transfer function of the digital controller
D(x) =
1840(10.286≈¯¹)(1 − 0.6362-¹)
(1 + 0.2x¯¹)(1 + 1.277z¯¹)
(9-209)
Note that although D(z) has a pole outside the unit circle in the z-plane, it
is still physically realizable.
9.7 DESIGN USING THE STALENESS WEIGHTING FACTOR
In the preceding section we have seen that sampled-data systems
which are designed for finite settling time and zero steady-state error
for a particular test input usually do not provide satisfactory per-
formances when other types of inputs are applied. For instance, the
system in Example 9-9 is designed to respond with finite settling
time and zero steady-state error when subjected to a ramp input.
However, the step response of the designed system exhibits a highly
undesirable peak overshoot of 128 percent. A system that is extremely
sensitive to the form of its input signal is seldom acceptable in
practice, since it is very unlikely that the system will be subject to
only the specific kind of input signal for which it is designed.
Therefore, a design procedure should be developed to lead to a
system that will respond satisfactorily not just to one signal but to
a number of different test signals. A compromise may be reached
among the responses of a system to several different test signals by
introducing a "staleness-weighting factor" into the over-all system
transfer function. If M(z) denotes the over-all system function that
provides a minimal response (zero steady-state error and minimum
finite settling time) for a specific test signal, the staleness-weighting
factor is introduced into the system in the following manner:
Insertion of the factor (1 cz¹) into the denominator of
1 - M(z) yields
-
1 - M,(z)
=
-
1 - M(z)
(1 − cz¹)
(9-210)
where c is the staleness-weighting factor. For the over-all system to
be stable, c should satisfy the relation -1 < c < +1.
When the staleness-weighting factor is introduced into the denomi-
nator of 1 M(z), the characteristic equation of the compensated
† J. E. Bertram, "Factors in the Design of Digital Controllers for Sampled-data
Feedback Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 75, Part 2 July 1956, pp. 151–159.

Sec. 9.7
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 341
system is no longer of the form 2" = 0 and the error of the system
does not settle to zero in a finite period of time. However, the
addition of the staleness-weighting factor does not improve the
infinite sensitivity of the system response to parameter variations,
since the characteristic equation still contains a multiple order pole
at z = 0. With a proper choice of the value of c, the peak overshoot
of the step response can be reduced when the system is designed
for a ramp input, and the transient response can be reduced to a
tolerable amount within reasonable time interval.
The use of the staleness-weighting factor in the design of sampled-
data systems is illustrated by the following numerical example.
Example 9-10
Consider the sampled-data system designed in Example 9-8. The controlled
process, including the hold device, is described by the transfer function
G,(z)
=
0.005 (10.92-1)
(121)(1 − 0.9052-1)
(9-211)
The sampling period is 0.1 second. A digital controller must be designed so
that the ramp response has zero steady-state error at the sampling instants,
and at the same time a compromise between the overshoot of the step response
and the settling time may be reached. According to the previous design rules
for a ramp input
hence
-
1 − M(z) = (1 − ≈¯¹)²
M() 2-1-2-2
=
(9-212)
(9-213)
which is the minimal over-all system function for a ramp input. The step
response and the ramp response of the compensated system have been illus-
trated in Figs. 9-37b and 9-37e, respectively. Note that while the ramp
response is described as minimal, the step response exhibits a peak overshoot
of 100 percent.
Now applying the staleness-weighting factor to 1 M(z) in accordance
with Eq. (9-210) yields
-
1 - M,(z)
=
--
(1 − x-¹)²
1 cz-1
Solving for M,(z) in Eq. (9-214), we have
Ms(2)
(2 - c)z-¹
www
1 - cz-¹
(9-214)
(9-215)
Referring to Eq. (9-215), we see that for negative values of c greater than
-1, the introduction of the staleness-weighting factor actually increases the
peak overshoot of the step response. The optimum value of c would seem to
be slightly less than +1, since this value would produce the least amount of
overshoot in the step response. However, we shall show that the overshoot
can be reduced only at the expense of longer settling time. To illustrate the
effect of the staleness-weighting factor and to assist the selection of an optimum
value of c, the step and the ramp responses of the system at the sampling

342
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
2.5r
2.아
​C = -0.5
c = 0 (Minimal response)
C = 0.5
1.5
C = 0.8
9
1.0
r(t)
0.5
T
2T 3T
4T
5T 6T 7T
8T 9T IOT
Time (sec)
6
5
c(nT)
4
c = -0.5
3
2 r(t)
--
(a)
-C = 0.8
C = 0.5
c = 0 (Minimal response)
T
2T 3T
4T
57
6T
7T 8T 9T IOT
Time (sec)
(b)
立
​IIT
זון
Fig. 9-39 Step and ramp responses of the system in Example
9-10. (a) Unit step responses. (b) Ramp responses.
instants are plotted in Figs. 9-39a and 9-39b, respectively, for several values
of c between 1 and +1. Observe that for c = 0.8, the peak overshoot in
the step response is only 20 percent but the transient in the step and the
ramp responses settle very slowly. On the other hand, for negative or small
values of c, whereas the ramp response may be satisfactory, the overshoot
in the step response is too large to be acceptable. A satisfactory compromise

Sec. 9.8
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 343
between overshoot and settling time may be reached when c is in the neigh-
borhood of 0.5.
∞
In the literature, a more quantitive method for the selection of
a desirable value of c has been devised to yield a compromise between
the step and the ramp responses. The method is based on the minimi-
zation of the sum of the squared error Σ [e(mT)]² which is simply
the sum of the squares of the coefficients of the following equation
when it is written as a series or polynomial in z¨¹:
m=0
E(x) = R(x)[1 − M(2)]
-
(9-216)
Unfortunately, the minimum values of the sums of the squared
errors of a ramp response and a step response often occur at oppo-
site ends of the permissible range of the staleness-weighting factor
c. In any given system, a minimum of the squared error can usually
not be found that will result in optimum performance for both the
step and the ramp inputs.
9.8 COMBINATION OF THE Z-PLANE SYNTHESIS
AND THE MINIMAL RESPONSE DESIGN
Sampled-data control systems designed by the minimal response
method described in the preceding sections, whether or not the
staleness-weighting factor is used, all contain the following disad-
vantages:
(1) The design is conducted on the basis of the response at the
sampling instants with the result that intersampling ripples may
exist in the output response.
(2) The characteristic equation of the system has multiple order
roots at z = 0, a condition which corresponds to that of the system
operating at a point with infinite sensitivity to parameter variations.
(3) Even with the staleness-weighting factor, a system which will
perform satisfactorily in response to various types of inputs is dif-
ficult to design.
In this section the z-plane synthesis method described in Sec.
9.5 will be combined with the design procedure for finite settling
time and zero steady-state error. In essence, a pair of complex control
poles are inserted in the over-all system transfer function for the
control over the transient response; and simultaneously, the system
must also have zero steady-state error for a ramp input. The domi-
† J. E. Bertram, op. cit.

344 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
nant poles of M(z) are selected to lie in the first and the fourth
quadrants of the z-plane so that hidden oscillations do not exist in
the output response.
The basic concept and procedure of the proposed design technique
can best be explained by the following example.
Example 9-11
The sampled-data control system under consideration has the block diagram
shown in Fig. 9-35. The fixed part of the system is described by the transfer
function
G,(z)
=
0.005≈¯¹(1 − 0.9%¯¹)
(1-2)(1 − 0.9052-¹)
-
(9-217)
The sampling period is 0.1 second. Note that the system is identical to those
used in Examples 9-6, 9-8, and 9-10. The problem is to select a digital
compensator which will enable the system to meet the following set of design
criteria:
(1) The steady-state error of the system in response to a ramp function
input should be zero (K, = ∞).
(2) The overshoot of the step response should be as small as possible
and the rise time and the settling time as short as possible.t
(3) The damping ratio of the dominant control poles of C(z)/R(z) should
equal 0.707.
Since G,(z) has one more pole than zero, to insure that D(z) is physically
realizable, the over-all system function M(z) must have at least one more
pole than zero. To satisfy the zero steady-state error requirement on the
ramp response, 1- M(z) should contain the factor (1-1). This also
satisfies the requirement that 1 – M(z) must include the poles of G,(z)
which lie on or outside the unit circle in the z-plane. The poles and zeros
of G,(z) inside the unit circle are cancelled by the poles and zeros of D(z).
Therefore, D(z) is of the form
D(z)
-
=
M(z)
1
X
G₂(2)
1 – M(≈) ^ G„(≈)
Κα
(1 − 0.905≈¯¹)(1 + a₁≈¯¹)(1 + az¯¹)
-
(10.9%¹)(1 − ≈¯¹)(1 + b₁≈¯¹)(1 + b₂≈¯¹) . .
.
3
...
(9-218)
where Ka is a constant; a1, a2,
and b₁, b₂, are the zeros and poles,
respectively, that are added to D(z) to improve the performance of the
system. For D(z) to be physically realizable the order of the denominator
of D(z) must be at least as high as that of the numerator. In general, the
least possible number of poles and zeros should be used in D(z) so that the
implementation of the digital controller is the simplest.
+ Because of the zero steady-state error requirement imposed on the ramp response
and the possibility of G,(z) having zeros outside the unit circle, the zeros of M(z)
cannot be chosen arbitrarily. Therefore, the designer does not have complete control
over the peak overshoot of the step response as he did in the synthesis method of Sec.
9.5.

Sec. 9.8
345
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Taking the product of D(z) and G,(z), the open-loop transfer function of
the compensated system is written as
D(z)G,(z) =
d
0.005K≈¯¹(1 + a¸≈¯¹)(1 + a½z¯¹)
(1 − ≈¯¹)²(1 + b¸≈¯¹)(1 + b₂≈¯¹)
(9-219)
The minimum order in z of the system is two. In other words, the simplest
form of D(z)G,(z) is
D(2)G,(z)
0.005K ¹(1 + a₁≈¯¹)
=
(1 − ≈¯¹)²
2
(9-220)
which has two unknowns in Ka and a₁. The characteristic equation of the
system is the numerator of 1 + D(z)G,(≈) and is equal to the sum of the
numerator and the denominator of Eq. (9-220). Therefore, the characteristic
equation reads
or
(11)²+0.005Kaz¹(1 + a₁≈¯¹) = 0
1+ (0.005Ka− 2)≈¯¹ + (1 +0.005Kaa₁)≈² = 0
-2
(9-221)
(9-222)
Let us use the characteristic equation of the system of Example 9-6.
The characteristic equation roots are at z = · 0.27 + j0.32 and z = 0.27 - j0.32,
and the equation is
10.542-¹ + 0.1782-2
=
0
(9-223)
Equating the coefficients of equal powers of z¹ in Eqs. (9-222) and (9-223)
and solving for Ka and a yields
Kd = 292
=
ai -0.563
Therefore, the pulse transfer function of the digital controller is
D(z)
=
292(1 − 0.563≈¯¹)(1 − 0.905≈¯¹)
(1 − ≈¹)(1 − 0.9~-¹)
The over-all system transfer function is
(9-224)
(9-225)
M(z)
C(z) 1.462-1(1-
-
0.5632-1)
=
=
R(2) 10.54≈ 1 + 0.1782-2
(9-226)
The step and the ramp responses of the system with the designed digital
compensation are plotted in Fig. 9-40. The step response exhibits a peak
overshoot of 46 percent. The ramp response gets to within one percent of its
final value in about four sampling periods. These responses compare favorably
with the minimal step and ramp responses of the same system shown in
Fig. 9-39. Even with the staleness-weighting factor design the overshoot of
the step response in Fig. 9-39 for c = 0.5 is comparable to that of the step
response in the present design, but the settling time in the present system
is faster.
More significant is the fact that the characteristic equation of the system
designed with the present method does not possess any multiple order root.
Therefore, the sensitivity of the system to parameter variations is definitely
improved.
The peak overshoot of the designed system can be decreased still further
by reducing the resonant frequency of the system; however this reduction

346 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
1.5
0.5
5
r(t)
Characteristic Eq: 1-0.54z"¹+ 0.178z-2
Characteristic Eq: 1-1.4z"¹ +0.54z-2
+
27
37 4T 57 6T 77 8T 97 IOT
Time (sec)
(a)
4
C(AT)
3ㅏ
​r(t)
Characteristic Eq: 1-0.54z"¹+0.178z-2
Characteristic Eq: 1-1.4z¹ +0.54z2
2T 3T
4T
57 6T
Time (sec)
(b)
ז7
8T 97 IOT
Fig. 9-40 Step and ramp responses of the system in Example
9-11. (a) Step responses. (b) Ramp responses.
would cause a longer rise time and settling time. For instance, if the charac-
teristic equation roots are chosen to be z = 0.7j0.225 and z = = 0.7 — j0.225,
a change which will yield a damping ratio of 0.707, the characteristic equation
becomes
-
1 1.42+0.54≈-2
= 0
(9-227)
Equating the coefficients of equal powers of z-¹ in Eqs. (9-222) and (9-227)
and solving for Ka and a, yields
Κα
=
120
The over-all system transfer function is
(9-228)
a₁ =
-0.767
-1
0.62 (10.7672-1)
M(2)
=
1 − 1.4≈¯¹ + 0.54≈ 2
(9-229)

Sec. 9.9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 347
The step and the ramp responses are also plotted in Fig. 9-40. The overshoot
in the step response is reduced to 30 percent. However, the peak time, rise
time, and the settling time are increased considerably.
A compromise is usually necessary in selecting the location of the control
poles of the system in order to yield reasonable results for the overshoot and
response time.
9.9 SYNTHESIS BY THE STATE VARIABLE AND
STATE TRANSITION APPROACH
The state variable and state transition concepts introduced in
Chapter 5 as a general approach to the analysis of linear discrete-
data control systems can be used for the purpose of synthesis. We
shall see that with the help of the variable gain concept, the state
transition method provides a simple and systematic synthesis procedure
for linear (as well as nonlinear) discrete-data control systems. The
development of the synthesis procedure makes use of the transition
flow graph and equations. Digital compensation is designed for the
linear system to have deadbeat performance. In Chapter 12 the same
technique is extended to synthesize nonlinear control for the com-
pensation of linear and nonlinear systems. The synthesis method
using the state variables concept is essentially a numerical method.
Once the synthesis procedure and equations are set up, the com-
putation can be carried out simply by a digital computer. The
method has one important advantage over the minimal response
design covered in Sec. 9.6 in that the state transition approach.
insures that the deadbeat response does not have intersampling
ripples.
Consider the sampled-data control system shown in Fig. 9-41.
The variables x1, x2, Xp, are the state variables of the controlled
process; h(t) is the output of the zero-order hold, and e(t) is the
...9
-h* (1)
Digital controller
e(t)
X₁ = C
D(s)
z.o.h.
G₁(s)
T
h(t)
4444
D(z)
Xp X3 X2
Fig. 9-41 Control system with digital controller.
† J. T. Tou, B. Vadhanaphuti, "Optimum Control of Nonlinear Discrete-Data
Systems," A. I. E. E. Trans., Part 2, September 1961, pp. 166–171.

348 DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
Chap. 9
actuating signal. Since the output of the digital controller is a train
of impulses, its values at the sampling instants are equal to the
output of the zero-order hold at the sampling instants. Therefore,
the z-transfer function of the digital controller can be written as
D(z) = H(z)|E(z)
where
(9-230)
H(x) = h(0+) + h(T+)z¯¹ + h(2T+)z¯² + . . . +h(nT+)z¯*
and
(9-231)
E(z) = e(0+) + e(T+)z¯¹ + e(2T+ )z¯² + ...
+...+e(nT+)z¯”
(9-232)
In the state variable approach, since only one term in each of Eqs.
(9-231) and (9-232) is of interest during one sampling period, the
digital controller may be replaced by a variable gain amplifier with
gain K(kT) which will have different values during different sampling
periods. K(kT) is given by
K(kT) = h(kT+)/e(kT+)
(9-233)
This way the digital controller is represented by the variable gain
amplifier with gain K(kT) on the state transition flow graph during
the time interval kT <t≤ (k + 1)T.
The synthesis procedure and technique are outlined as follows:
(1) Draw the state transition flow graph of the system with the
digital controller represented by the variable gain amplifier K(kT).
From the transition flow graph, the transition equations are written
in the following vector-matrix form:
-
x(t) = y(t to, Kk)x(to) + O(t − to, Kx)r(to)
where for simplicity K(kT) is written as Kk.
(9-234)
(2) For a deadbeat response the system error must be zero for
t>nT, where n is the smallest possible positive integer. This condi-
tion is realized if
and
x₁(nT) = r(nT)
x2(nT) = xз(nT)
=
=
.
= x(nT) = 0
=
(9-235)
(9-236)
Since x(nT), x2(nT),... are functions of Kk, for k = 0, 1, 2, . . . n,
the variable gain K for k = 0, 1, 2, . . . n, can be determined from
Eqs. (9-235) and (9-236).
(3) Compute h(0+), h(T+),...,
.., h(nT+), using the Ka's deter-
mined in the last step, Eq. (9-233), and the relationship
e(kT+) = r(kT) − x、(kT)
(9-237)
(4) Determine the transfer function D(z) of the digital controller
using Eqs. (9-230), (9-231), and (9-232).

Sec. 9.9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 349
The synthesis procedure is illustrated by the following numerical
examples.
Example 9-12
Consider that in the sampled-data system of Fig. 9-41. G,(s) = 1/s(s + 1),
r(t) = unit step function, T = 0.1 second, and all initial conditions are zero.
A digital controller is to be designed for the system to exhibit a deadbeat
response. Note that the problem is identical to that stated in Example 9-8
except that in the previous example the deadbeat response is realized only
at the sampling instants. In fact, the so-called deadbeat response exhibits
overshoots and ripples during sampling periods, and the design should actually
be termed insignificant. However, with the state transition approach, inter-
sampling ripple is certain not to occur in the deadbeat response.
The state transition flow graph of the system is constructed as shown in
Fig. 9-42. Note that the digital controller is represented by a variable gain
amplifier with gain K(to) connected between the nodes e(t) and h(t). The
transition equations are written directly from the flow graph.
r(to)
K(10)
e(t)
h(t) H(s)
-1
x₁(10)
(x₂(5)
x₁(5)
Fig. 9-42 Transition flow graph of control system with digital
compensation. (Example 9-12).
x₁(t)
=
-
-
-
{1 K(to)[(t to) − 1 + e-t-to)]}x₁(to)
+ [1 − e−(l−lo)]x2(to)+K(to)[(t − to) − 1 + e−(l−10)]r(to)
-
-
x(t) = −K(to)[1 − e¯-to)].x,(to) + e-(t-to)x₂(to)
For to
read
1=
+ K(to)[1 − e−(l-to)]r(to)
-
(9-238)
(9-239)
kT, t= (k + 1)T, T: = 0.1 second, r(kT) = 1, the last two equations
x₁[(k + 1)T] = (1 0.005K)x, (kT) + 0.095.x (kT) +0.005Kk (9-240)
x[(k + 1)T] = -0.095Kx₁(kT) + 0.905x₂(kT) + 0.905Kk (9-241)
-
We are now ready to incorporate the conditions for deadbeat response
listed in Eqs. (9-235) and (9-236). Substituting k = 0, x,(0) = 0, and
x(0) = 0, into Eqs. (9-240) and (9-241), we have
and
-
x₁(T) 0.005K,
x2(T) = 0.095K,
(9-242)
(9-243)

350
Chap. 9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS
If the output response is to reach its steady state value in one sampling period
with zero error, it is necessary that x,(T) = 1 and x2(T) = 0. In view of
Eqs. (9-242) and (9-243), we see that this balance cannot be achieved. Next,
we try k 1. Substitute k 1 and the values of x,(T) and x,(T) into Eqs.
(9-240) and (9-241), and if deadbeat response is to occur after two sampling
periods, we have
-
=
=
--
x₁(2T) 0.014K, 0.000025K,K, +0.005K₁ = 1
x2(2T) = -0.000475K,K₁ + 0.086K。 + 0.095K₁ = 0
Solving for K, and K, from the last two equations yields Ko
K₁
-
-203. Therefore,
e(T+) = r(T) − x,(T) = 1 0.005(105.6)= 0.472
—
e(0+) = r(0) — x,(0) = 1
-
-
h(T+) = Ke(T+) = -203(0.972) = -197
h(0+) = Koe(0+) = 105.6
(9-244)
(9-245)
=
105.6 and
(9-246)
(9-247)
(9-248)
(9-249)
Substituting the last four equations into Eq. (9-230) yields the transfer function
of the digital controller.
D(z) =
h(0+)+h(T+)≈¯¹
-
105.6 1972-1
=
-1
1 +0.472≈
e(0+) + e(T+)≈¯¹
(9-250)
The compensated system has a unit step response without intersampling
ripples like that shown in Fig. 9-43. However, the digital compensation thus
c(1)
0 7 27 374757677787 97
Fig. 9-43 Deadbeat response of the system in Example 9-12.
designed is optimum only when a step input is applied to the system. The
system may not perform satisfactorily when any other basic test signal such
as a ramp or a parabolic function is applied.
In this section we have described the synthesis of control systems
with digital controllers by means of the state transition technique.
The synthesis procedure involves four major steps and is very simple
and straightforward. The synthesis method makes use of the variable
gain amplifier representation of the unknown controller. The content
of the controller is entirely general. Once the optimum K is deter-
mined for k = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . ., n, the controller could actually contain
linear elements, nonlinear elements, and time-invariant as well as
time-variant elements. The nature of the state transition design
assures that the output response of the synthesized system is free

Sec. 9.9
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS BY DIGITAL CONTROLLERS 351
from intersampling ripples (provided that the sampling frequency is
high enough). However, the design is optimum only for the specific
input for which it is intended. The designed system does not provide
satisfactory performance for a wide class of inputs.
REFERENCES
Andeen, R. E., "Staggered Sampling to Improve Stability of Multiple Sampler
Feedback Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 77, Part 2 1958, pp. 399-403.
Desoer, C. A., "Transmission Through a Linear Network Containing a Peri-
odically Operated Switch," I. R. E., WESCON Convention Record, Part 2,
1953.
Friedland, B., Sampled-data Control Systems Containing Periodically Varying
Members," Proc. of the International Federation of Automatic Control, Moscow,
1960, pp. 139–146.
Gilbert, E. O., "A Method for the Symbolic Representation and Analysis of
Linear Periodic Feedback Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., Part 2 79, 1960, pp.
512-523.
Gimpleson, L. A., "Multiple-Rate Sampled-Data Systems," I. R. E., Trans. on
Automatic Control, Vol. AC-5, January 1960, pp. 30-37.
Hufnagel, R. E., "Analysis of Cyclic Rate Sampled-Data Feedback Control
Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 77, Part 2 1958, pp. 421-423.
Kalman, R. E., and Bertram, J. E., "A Unified Approach to the Theory of
Sampling Systems," Journal of Franklin Inst., May 1959, pp. 267-405.
Kranc, G. M., "Compensation of an Error-Sampled System by a multirate
Controller," Trans. A. I. E. E., Part 2 1957, pp. 149–159.
Kranc, G. M., "Input-output Analysis of Multirate Feedback Systems," Trans.
I. R. E., Vol. AC-3, November 1957, pp. 21-28.
Kranc, G. M., "Optimum Multirate Controller for a Sampled Feedback
System," Proc. of the International Federation on Automatic Control, Moscow,
1960, pp. 340-346.
Tou, J. T., "Multiple Variable-rate Discrete-data Control Systems," Proc. of
the International Federation of Automatic Control, Moscow, 1960, pp. 266–273.

10
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
The sampled-data systems considered in the preceding chapters
have one feature in common; they contain a number of samplers
which operate in synchronism with the same sampling rate. Such
systems are usually described as single-rate sampled-data systems. In
general, there are systems which contain two or more samplers
operating with different sampling rates; the sampling may or may not
be synchronized. Systems having a sampler which operates with a
nonuniform aperiodic or cyclic-variable rate are also common; and
are called cyclic-rate sampled-data systems. The multirate or cyclic-
rate sampled-data systems may also be regarded as skip-sampled
systems, since the sampling schemes can be thought of as the result
of periodically omitting (or skipping) samples from a uniform sampling
operation.
In order to distinguish it from single-rate sampled systems a
multirate sampled-data system is defined here as a system containing
synchronized switches that do not operate with the same sampling
rate.
In many instances, the practical application of multirate sampled
systems arises from actual physical existence of such systems. This
may occur, for instance, in the case of flight-control systems when
a data link computer operates at a rate different from the speed of
the radar antenna. In addition to the above mentioned case, situa-
G. M. Kranc, "Input-Output Analysis of Multirate Feedback Systems," I. R. E.
Transactions on Automatic Control, November 1957, pp. 21-28.
352

Sec. 10.1
353
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
tions may arise where multirate sampling must be incorporated
intentionally to improve the performance of a given system. A digital
controller operating at a higher rate than the basic sampling rate of
the system is an example of this sort of situation. In a later section
we shall show that systems with properly designed multirate digital
compensators have better performance than those with single-rate
sampling. The skip or cyclic-rate sampling technique may also be
employed to obtain a novel type of controller with which deadbeat
performance can be achieved.
10.1 MULTIRATE SAMPLING
Open-Loop Systems
The block diagrams of typical open-loop systems with multirate
sampling are shown in Fig. 10.1. In the systems of Figs. 10-1a and
10-1b, the samplers are assumed to be synchronized, but one sampler
is operating N times faster than the other. In Fig. 10-1c the two
synchronized samplers operate with rates of 1/T₁ and 1/T2, respec-
tively. Usually, in order to simplify the mathematics of analysis, it
is necessary to assume that N is an integer and that T₁ and T₂ are
commensurable.
1
Consider the multirate system shown in Fig. 10-1a, and assume
that N is an integer. The output signal of the system is sampled at
a rate N times faster than the sampling rate at the input. The out-
put of the multirate sampler with sampling rate T/N is written as
e(t)e*(1)
T S₁
c(+) X
G(s)
(1)N
TIN SN
(a)
e(r)e*(f)N
c(1)
G(s)
c(t)
TIN SN
TS1
(b)
e*(N₁
c (1)
e(1)
G(s)
Τι
SN₁
Το
SN2
(N2
(c)
Fig. 10-1 Open-loop systems with multirate sampling.
† G. M. Kranc, "Compensation of an Error-Sampled System by a Multirate Control-
ler," Trans. A. I. E. E., 77, July 1957, pp. 149-159.

354
Chap. 10
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
e(t)
e*(t),
T
2T
37
4T
c(t)
(N
(N=3)
co(1)
7/3
T
27
T 4T 57
27 77 8T
3
6/00
37
1979
(0)
E/M
4T
T
27
3T
4T
c2(1) at
4T
345
27
5T
3
15/m
175
77
IOT
137
(b)
olm
8T
IIT
3
c* (t)3 = c(t) + c*(t) + c* (t)
Fig. 10-2 (a) Typical signals at various points of the multirate
sampled-data system of Fig. 10-1a. (b) Skip-sampled components
of c*(t) shown in (a).
00
kT
c* (t) x = Σ c(kT) 8 (t − KT)
k=0
-
(10-1)
which is essentially a unit-impulse train of frequency NT, amplitude-
modulated by c(t). As an illustration, a typical set of signals that
appears at various points of the system is depicted in Fig. 10-2a for
N = 3. By pure physical reasoning, the output signal c*(t) x_for
N = 3 can be regarded as the sum of three skip-sampled components,

Sec. 10.1
355
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
c*(t), c(t), and cr(t), as shown in Fig. 10-2b. In general, the skip-
sampled component c(t) (n = 0, 1, 2, . . ., N-1) is formed from
c*(t) by taking every N-th sample starting with the n-th, where
n = 0, 1, 2, . . ., N-1. From Fig. 10-2b we see that a skip-sampled
component of a multirate sampled signal c*(t) can be obtained by
sampling c(t) with a "skip-sampled" sampler which consists of a
time advance, a time delay, and a basic sampler S, whose sampling
period is T. The skip-sampled sampler that gives the n-th component
of c*(t) is shown in Fig. 10-3.
N
N
c(t)
ents/N
Ch(t)
e-nts/N
T S₁
Time delay
Time advance
Fig. 10-3 A skip-sampled sampler.
A sampler with multirate sampling rate T/N can now be de-
composed into a parallel combination of N skip-sampled samplers,
each with appropriate delay and advance elements as shown in Fig.
10-4. The equivalent block diagram of the system of Fig. 10-1a with
sampler decomposition is shown in Fig. 10-5. Since now all samplers
of the skip-sampled sampler model have the same sampling rate, it
c*(1)N
c(t)
SN
TIN
equivalent to
eTs/N
e-Ts/N
C₁(1)
co(t)
c(t)
e2Ts/N
e-2Ts/N
C2(1)
+
c*(t)
e3Ts/N
e-3Ts/N
c3(1)
ekts/N
CK (1)
*
(CN-1(1)
(N-1)Ts
e N
پاک
-(N-1)Ts
e
N
Fig. 10-4 Decomposition of multirate sampler into N skip-sampled
samplers.

356 MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Chap. 10
is conceivable that ordinary z-transform technique can be used to
analyze the system. From Fig. 10-4, the output of the multirate
sampled system is written.
N-1
c*(t)n = Σ c*(t)
Σε* (1)
7=0
−
(10-2)
where c(t) represents the n-th (n = 0, 1, 2, . . ., N 1) skip-
sampled component and
c#
00
nT
N
- kT - nT)
(10-3)
N
că (t) = Σ c(kT + ¹T) 8 (t –
k=0
Substituting Eq. (10-3) into Eq. (10-2), we have
N-1 00
c*(t) x = Z Σ c(kT + ¹T)8(t − kT – nT)
n=0 k=0
nT
N
-
(10-4)
The continuous output of G(s) is obtained from the superposition
principle; that is
Thus
00
-
-
c(t) = Σ e(mT)g(t − mT)
m=0
00
c(kT + n ) = Σ e(mT)g(kT + n − mT)
N
f)
m=0
N
Substitution of Eq. (10-6) into Eq. (10-4) yields
nT
(10-5)
(10-6)
N-1 00
00
N
c* (t) x = Σ Σ Σ e(mT)g(kT +
Z≥ N − mT) 8 (t − kT –
-
-
KT - )
nT
n=0 k=0 M=0
N
(10-7)
Taking the Laplace transform on both sides of Eq. (10-7), we have
N-1 00
C*(s) N =
Σ Σ g kT +
n=0 K=0
nT
N
- (k + n/N) Ts
Σe(mT)e-mrs (10-8)
m=0
ci(t)
co(t)
eTs/N
e-Ts/N
e(t) X _e*(†)
c(t)
G(s)
e2Ts/N
e-2Ts/N
c2(1)
(1)N
T S₁
CIZIN
ekts/N
e-kTs/N
CK(1)
(N-1)TS
X
CN-1(1)
-(N-1)Ts
e
N
e
N
Fig. 10-5 Equivalent skip-sampled system of the multirate sampled
system of Fig. 10-1a.

Sec. 10.1
357
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
or
N-1
Σ
(10-9)
C*(s) N = [G(s) enTs/N]* E* (s) e¯nTs/N
n0
The z-transform of c*(t)x then reads
N-1
-n/N
C(z)n = Σ Z[G(s) en™s/N]E(z) z¯"/N
N
72=0
(10-10)
Equation (10-10) gives an important relationship for the analysis of
the multirate sampling system of Fig. 10-1a; the equation represents
the z-transform of the output of the multirate sampler in terms of
the products of the ordinary z-transforms of E(s) and e-nts/NG(s).
The z-transform of e-TS/NG(s) can be expressed in terms of the
modified z-transform of G(s). From the modified z-transform theory,
we have
00
3m[G(s)] = G(z,m) = 2
Σ g[(kT +mT)]x¯* 0<m<1
k=0
(10-11)
Multiplying both sides of Eq. (10-11) by z'-"/N and replacing m by
n/N, we have
n
2¹-n/~ G(z, ~ ) = ≥ 8(kT + nT
-k-(n/N)
(10-12)
k=0
n
N
N
-n/N
2¹-N/NG(z, ~ ) = Z[ew™w~G(s)]z¯"~ _0<n/N<1
Thus
Now Eq. (10-10) can be written as
N-1
x' (n/N)
0 <n\N≤1 (10-13)
C(x)x = G(x)E(x) + Σ 2¹-(~~) G (2, 1) E(z)
n=1
(10-14)
Equation (10-14) is more convenient to use than Eq. (10-10), since
in it G(z, n/N) is readily determined from the modified z-transform
table with m replaced by n/N.
An alternate form for C(z) can be obtained if we let (v/N) =
k+ (n/N). Then
v=0
N-1 00
00
ZZ8(KT + T)e
Σ Σg kT
nT
N
- {k+(n/N)] T's
=
g
n=0 k=0
Z 8 (1)
T
N
2-UTS/N = G(z)N (10-15)
and
where
(10-16)
(10-17)
C(z) = G(2)xE(z)
G(z)x = [G(z)]2=2-1/N
N
T=T/N
Equation (10-16) gives the z-transform of the output of the multirate
sampled system of Fig. 10-1a as the product of E(z) and G(2)N
where the latter is obtained from the ordinary z-transform G(z) by
replacing z and T by z- and T/N, respectively.
-1/N

358 MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Chap. 10
Example 10-1
Determine the z-transform of the output of the system shown in Fig. 10-6.
Using Eq. (10-14), we find the z-transform of the system output for N = 3
to be
C(≈), = G(≈) E(≈) + Σ z¹-(~³)G(≈, 7) E(z)
7=1
3
(10-18)
From the table of z-transforms and modified z-transforms, the following func-
tions are obtained :
G(z)
=
(1-e)
(≈1)(z-e-T)
(10-19)
e(t)
X
e*(t)
1
G(s)=-
C(1) XC²(FIN
S₁
s(s+1)
TIN SN
Fig. 10-6 Multirate sampled-data system of Example 10-1.
1
and
G(z, m)
=
Thus
C(z)3 = E(z)
E(2) [ (z
-
+
༤
e-27/3
2-e
which is simplified to
C(2)3 =
-
(≈1/³ — 1) (2 1/3 — e-T³) E(2)
.
e-mr
༤ ་ 1
(1 e-T)
-
− 1)(≈ − e−7)
❖ -
(10-20)
1
+
-
e-T/3
1 z-e
22/3
(10-21)
(1-e-T/3) 1/3
(10-22)
..
For any given input E(z) the values of the output response of the system
at the sampling instants kT/3, (k = 0, 1, 2, .) are determined by first letting
23 = 213 and then by expanding C(z), by long division into a power series
in powers of zz¹; and c(kT/3) is given by the coefficient of the z* term.
This procedure is essentially similar to the submultiple sampling method used
for the determination of response between sampling instants of a sampled-data
system.
We shall now show that the output z-transform of the system can also be
obtained from Eq. (10-17); that is
G(z)3
-
(1-e-T)z
1)(≈ e
-
e-T)
=
z=21/n
T-Tn
(1-e-T3) 1/3
(≈¹,³ — 1)(≈¹³ − e−T; 3)
3
(10-23)
Evidently, this equation will lead to the same result for C(z) as that given
by Eq. (10-22).
For more complex open-loop systems with multirate sampling
(with the basic sampler preceding the multirate rate sampler or
samplers), methods similar to that described above can be applied.
The z-transforms of the outputs of the systems shown in Figs. 10-
7a and 10-7b are respectively
and
C(z). = G,(z).Gz(z).E(z)
N
C(z) = G₁(2)G₂(z)NE(z)
N
(10-24)
(10-25)

Sec. 10.1
359
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
e(t)
e*(t)
G₁(s)
G₂(s)
X
TIN
TIN
(a)
e(t)
X
c(1)N
G₁(s)
G₂(5)
TIN
(b)
Fig. 10-7 Block diagrams of open-loop multirate sampled systems.
N
The previous section is devoted to the study of the multirate
sampling system of Fig. 10-1a through the use of the weighting
sequence and the z-transform methods. The purpose of going through
these seemingly complicated derivations of C(z) is to obtain a good
understanding of the characteristics of a multirate sampling system.
Actually, a simplified analysis of the system can be made by refer-
ring to the equivalent block diagram with skip-sampled samplers and
applying the signal flow graph technique. As has been shown pre-
viously, the signal flow graph method can be used effectively in the
study of multiloop sampled-data systems. The concept of the sampled-
flow graphs shall now be extended to sampled-data systems with
multirate samplers.
Let us consider the open-loop multirate system shown in Fig.
10-1b. Since the input signal is sampled with a rate of N/T and
since the output of the system is sampled with a rate of 1/T, the
analysis of the system is necessarily different from that described for
the system of Fig. 10-1a. The equivalent skip-sampled block diagram
of the system is depicted in Fig. 10-8a, and the equivalent signal
flow graph with skip-sampled samplers is constructed in Fig. 10-8b.
From this signal flow graph, the pulse transform of c(t) is written
directly+
C*
=
N-1
N-1
Σ (Ge¯nts N )*X* = Σ (Ge¬nTs/N) * ( E e™™«;N )* (10-26)
72=0
n=0
where for simplicity, C*(s) is denoted by its shorthand notation C*,
G(s) by G, etc.
The z-transform of c(t) is
N-1
C(z) = Σ3[e¬rs/NG(s)] Z[ents/N E(s)]
N=0
(10-27)
† Actually, C(z) can be written directly from the block diagram of Fig. 10-8a.
The introduction of the signal flow graph method here is intended to lay the founda-
tion for future work when multiloop systems with multirate sampling are studied.

360
Chap. 10
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
eTs/N
e-Ts/N
e₁(1) e (1)
e(t)
e2Ts/N
e-2Ts/N
e2(1)
+
G(s)
[C(+) X _c* (1)
T S₁ C(z)
-ekTs/N
--- e-KTSIN ex(t)
(N-1)Ts
e
N
e
-(N-1)Ts
N
(a)
*
eN-1(1)
1
eTs/N
e-TS/N
оха
1
G
EO
e2Ts/N
e-2Ts/N
E
OX2
CTC
ekts/N
e-kTS/N
--OXk
-(N-1)TS
e N
(N-1)Ts
e N
OXN-1
XN-1
(b)
Since
and
Fig. 10-8 (a) Equivalent skip-sampled system of the multirate
sampled system of Fig. 10-1b. (b) Signal flow graph of the
equivalent block diagram of (a).
¸nts/N E(s) = zE(z, n/N) 0 <n/N≤1
-nTs/N
entsNG(s) = G(z, 1- n|N) 0<nN<1
Equation (10-27) now becomes
N-1
(10-28)
(10-29)+
—
C(z) = E(z)G(z) + Σ zE(z, n/N)G(z, 1 − n/N) (10-30)
n = 1
As another possible multirate sampling scheme, let us consider
the open-loop system of Fig. 10-1c, in which the two samplers are
sampling at rates of 1/T₁ and 1/T₂ samples per second, respectively.
If we assume that T and T₂ are commensurable, i. e., the
ratio of T₁ to T, is a rational number, we can let T₁ = T/N₁, and
1
2
2
+ Note that [ents/NG(s)] = 2G(z, n/N) for n≤N but [e-nTs/NG(s)] = 2G(2,
-n/N).

Sec. 10.1
361
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Co(1)
esTIN₁
e-STIN₁
esT/N2
e-sT/N2
(1)
e2STIN
e-2ST/N₁
+
G(s)
e2STIN2
e-2ST/N2
+
eksTIN₁
X
-e-ksT/N₁
eksT/N₂
e
(N₁-1)Ts
-(N-1)Ts
N₁
e
N₁
(0)
e
N2
X
-e-ksT/N₂
(N2-1)TSX-N2-11TS
-N₂-1(1
e
N2
0%
eSTIN2-
e-STIN₂
ST/NOX₁
STINA
G₁
e2ST/N₁
e-2ST/N₁
e2sT/N2 e-2ST/N2
E
E
OX2 X2
2012 201
CN2
CN2
ekst/N₁ e-ksT/N₁
eksT/N2
e-ksT/N2
OXK
(N-1)ST
-(N₁-1)ST
e
(N2-1)ST
e
N₁
e
NA
e
N2
-(N2-1)ST
N2
XN₁-1 XN₁-
YN2-1 YN2-1
(b)
Fig. 10-9 (a) Equivalent block diagram with skip-sampled
samplers of the multirate sampled system of Fig. 10-1c. (b)
Signal flow graph of the equivalent block diagram of (a).
=
1
2
T = T/N₂, where T is the least common multiple of T, and T, and
N₁ and N, are integers. In general, if a sampled-data system contains
switches that operate with periods of T1, T2, . . ., Tn, a number T
and a set of integers N₁, N2, . . ., Nn can always be found such that
T₁ = T/N₁, T₂ = T/N2, T3 = T/N3, . . ., Tn T/Nn, provided that
the ratios of T₁ to T₂ to T3 to .. Tn are rational numbers. As
would follow, the two samplers of the system under study can be
replaced by equivalent skip-sampled samplers. The equivalent block
diagram of the system is shown in Fig. 10-9a, and the signal flow
graph of this equivalent block diagram is shown in Fig. 10-9b. The
z-transform of the system output is determined in the following
manner:
1
2

362
Chap. 10
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
CNN,
=
N₁-1
N₁-1
Σe-nts/N: Y*
n=0
(ents/N₁ Ge¯kTs/N₁)* Xi
(10-31)
But
Y*
=
k=0
N₁-1
=
(ents/N1 Ge¯kTs/N₁)* (ekTs/N₁ E)*
(10-32)
k=0
Therefore,
C*2
=
N₂-1
Σ
72==0
N₁-1
-nTs/N₂
e-
(ents/N:Ge-kT3/N1)* (ekTs/N¹E)*
(10-33)
k=0
N2-1
N₁-1
or
C(z)N, =
-n/N₂
Σε
Σ Z(ents/N₁ Ge¯kTs/N₁) Z(ekts/N: E) (10-34)
n=0
Example 10-2
=
Determine the z-transform of the output of the multirate sampled-data
system shown in Fig. 10-10a. Assuming that T₁ T/N₁ and T₂ = T/N2,
where T6 sec, N₁ 3, and N₂ = 2, the z-transform of the system output
according to Eq. (10-34) is
=
C(z)₂ =
Σ
2-1/2
2
n=0
2
Ż Z(ents/2G(s) e-kTw/3) Z (ATV/³ E(s)) (10-35)
Expanding the right-hand side of the last equation, we have
C(2)2 = G(2)E(≈) + Z[G(s) e¯Ts/³] Z[eTs/³ E(s)] + Z[e−2Ts/3G(s)] Z[e²Ts/³ E(s)]
+ Z[e™³/2G(s)]E(z)2¯¹/² + 2¯1/² Z[e™s/G(s)] Z[e™/³ E(s)]
+ 2-1/2 Z[e¯Ts/BG(s)] Z[e²Ts/³E(s)]
From Eqs. (10-28) and (10-29), Eq. (10-36) is written as
(10-36)
C(2)2 = G(z) E(≈) + zG(z, 2/3) E(z, 1/3) + zG(z, 1/3) E(z, 2/3)
+ z¹/2G(z, 1/2) E(z) + z³2G(z, 1/6) E(z, 1/3) + z¹/2G(z, 5/6) E(z, 2/3)
1/(z1),
(10-37)
For a unit step input E(z, m) = 1/(z 1), and substituting the z-transform
and the modified z-transform of G(s) into Eq. (10-37), we have
C(z) =
=
1
− − e¯°)
е
2
(z − 1)(z — e˜º) [2² + (e˜' + e¯²) z + e˜³½¹² + (e˜³ + e¯¹) z³:?]
z² + 0.1533z + 0.0067z/2 + 0.41823 2
( z − 1)( z − 0.0025)
(10-38)
If we let Z2
=
z1/2, then z
=
C(z) 2
-
22 and Eq. (10-38) reads
z2 + 0.153322 + 0.41823 + 0.0067zy
21.00252 + 0.0025
(10-39)
which is expanded into the power series
C(2),
10.418z+1.15622+0.424723+ 1.1562 +0.425275 + ...
(10-40)
The waveform of c(t) and the signal from the output sampler, c*(t),, are
sketched in Fig. 10-10b.

Sec. 10.1
363
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
e(t) x e* (+)2
T₁=2 sec
G(s)
G(s) = 5+1
c(1)
X
c(1)3,
T₂=3 sec
(a)
c(1)
(1)3
c(1)3
1.585
1.155 0.425 1.156
0.418
-c(t)
1
о
2 3 4 6
8910 12
14
(b)
Fig. 10-10 (a) Multirate sampled-data system for Example 10–2.
(b) Unit step response of the system in Example 10-2.
When a zero-order hold or a transportation lag is located in an
open-loop system with multirate sampling, the transfer function G(s)
necessarily contains terms of the form, ears G₁(s), where a is a posi-
tive number and G₁(s) is a rational function of s. Under such con-
ditions Eqs. (10-10), (10-27), and (10-34) are still valid for the
respective open-loop sampling schemes shown in Fig. 10-1, as long
as the exponential terms in G(s) are combined with the exponential
terms of the equivalent samplers.
Generally speaking, the problem is in the evaluation of the z-
transform of ek G(s), where k is a positive number. Various pos-
sibilities are discussed in the following:
(1) 0 < k≤1
(2) 1≤ k
=
KT's
3[es G(s)] = m[G(s)]m-1-k = G(z, 1 – k) (10-41)
[es G(s)] = 23m[G(s)]m-k = zG(z, k)
(10-42)
Let kλ+A, where X is the largest integer less than k and
0A<1; then
kTs
-
3[e-T G(s)]= =zZ[e¯¹¹³G(s)] = z¯`Zm[G(S)]m=1-a = 2¯`G(z, 1 − ▲)
(10-43)
3[e G(s)] = [e™ G(s)] = 2¹ Zm[G($)]m-s = 2¹G(z, ▲) (10-44)
Z[e*™³G(s)] 2¹ Z[e¹™G(s)]
Thus, the problem of finding
[ers G(s)] is essentially reduced to
the computation of the modified z-transform of G(s).

364 MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Chap. 10
c (1)
T₁
C(z)
R(s)
E(s)
XELZINA
c(1)
G(s)
T₁ =TIN₁
C(s)
H(s)
T2=TIN2
(a)
eTs/N 1
Xo
-Ts/N₁
1
OX₁
Χα
ents/N₁
e-nts/N₁
R
E
-Xn
-(N-1)TS
(N-1)TS
e N₁
e N₁
XN₁-1
-H
eTs/N2
e-Ts/N2
YO
e-kTs/Nz
ekts/N2
-OY
YO
(N2-1)Ts
-(N₂-1)TS
N2
e
N2
•OYN₂"
YN2-1
(b)
G
Fig. 10-11 Closed-loop system with multirate sampling. (a) Block
diagram. (b) Signal flow graph.
Closed-Loop Systems With Multirate Sampling
The block diagram of a closed-loop system with multirate sampling
is shown in Fig. 10-11a. The two samplers are assumed to operate
with periods Ti =T/N₁ and T₂ = T/N2, respectively, where N₁ and
N₂ can be any finite nonzero integers. Since the presence of additional
multirate (or single rate) samplers would only increase the amount
of algebra necessary without affecting the method of analysis, the
system of Fig. 10-11a can be used to point out all the basic points
encountered in the general problem of analysis. The first step in the
procedure is to apply the skip-sampled technique, thus obtaining the
signal flow graph model shown in Fig. 10-11b. On this flow graph

Sec. 10.1
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING 365
..,
R is the system input, and C is the system output; but in addition
Xo, X1, . XN-1, Yo, Y1, . . ., YN,-1 also may be regarded as out-
put nodes, and X*, X†, . . ., X*,-1, Y*, Y*, Y.- are the artificial
input nodes. Writing all the starred transforms of all the output
signals, the following equations are formulated from the signal flow
graph:
X*
=
(ents/N₁R)*
-
N2-1
k=0
N₁-1
Σ (Ge¯nts/N₁)*X*
n=0
(10-45)
C*
=
Νι
(10-46)
(ents/N He-krs/N)* Y* (n = 0, 1, . . ., N₁ - 1)
1
E
eTs/2
G
-H
G*
e-Ts/2
OX₁
(0)
(e-sT/2G)*
-H
(b)
C
1
Yo-(est/2H)*
(est/2R)*
1
**
Olest/2R)*
(e-sT/2G)*
Yo-(est/2H)
-H
e-ST/2
G
OC
(c)
N₁ = 2, N₂ 1
Fig. 10-12 (a) Signal flow graph. (b) Sampled flow graph. (c)
Composite flow graph of multirate sampled system of Fig. 10-11.

366 MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Chap. 10
N₁-1
Y* =
m=1
(ekts/N: Ge-mTs/N₁)*X* (k = 1, 2, N₂-1) (10-47)
Y* C*
=
..."
(10-48)
Using these equations, we can construct a sampled-flow graph that
portrays the functional relations between the variables (enTs/N: R)*,
X, Y, and C*, where n = 0, 1, 2, . . ., N₁ - 1, and k = 1, 2, ...,
N₂- 1.
-
As an illustrative example, let N₁ = 2 and N₂ = 1 in the system
of Fig. 10-11. The signal flow graph model with skip-sampled samplers
||
C(z)
R(s)
D(s)
G(s)
TIN
C(s)
(a)
N-1
-nTs/NG(s)]
C(z) =
=
R(z) Σ [enrs/ND(s)] Z[e-nrs
C(z, m) =
72=0
N-1
1 + Σ Z[e"™s/ND(s)] Z[e¬nts/NG(s)]
71=0
N-1
R(z) 3m[e-T/NG(s)] Z[ents/N D(s)]
72=0
N-1
1 + Σ Z[e¹¹³/ND(s)] }[e¬n™³/NG(s)]
n=0
T C(z)
R(s)
D(s)
G(s)
TIN
C(s)
C(2)
=
C(z, m)
=
N-1
(b)
G(z) Σ 3[e¯nts/ND(s)] Z[e¹™s/N R(s)]
n=0
N-1
1+ 3[e-nts/ND(s)] Z[eurs/NG(s)]
7=0
N-1
G(z, m) [ers/N D(s)] Z[e¹rs/N R(s)]
N-I
n=0
1+ 2 3[e-*ND(s)]3[e”TG(s)]
71=0
Fig. 10-13 z-transforms and modified z-transforms of outputs of
some simple multirate sampled feedback control systems.

Sec. 10.1
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING 367
R(s)
C(s)
G(s)
+
TIN
C(z)
=
N-1
H(s)
(c)
Σ lens/NG(s)] [ers/NR(s)]
n=0
N-1
1 + Σ 3[e¯nts/NG(s)] Z[ents/N H(s)]
C(z, m)
=
n=0
N-1
n=0
N-I
¸-nrs/NG(s)] Z[enTs/N R(s)]
1 + Σ3[e-nts/NG(s)] Z[e”™s/N H(s)]
20
Fig. 10-13 (continued)
is depicted in Fig. 10-12a. The following equations are written from
the signal flow graph:
X* R* H*Y*
= · –
X* = (esT,²R)* − (e$T/2H)*Y*
C* = G*X* + (e¯ST, 2G)*X*
Y* = C*
(10-49)
(10-50)
(10-51)
(10-52)
Based on these equations, the sampled-flow graph of the system is
now depicted in Fig. 10-12b, and the starred transform of the system
output is written directly as
C*
=
G*R*+ (e-ST, 2G)* (esT;2R)*
1 + G*H* + (e−sT/2G)* (e³T/2H)*
The z-transform of the output is
C(z)
*****
G(z)H(2) + 3(e-T/2G) 3 (e2R)
ST,
1 +G(z)H(z) + Z[e˜³™: ²G(s)] Z[e³™ ²H(s)]
(10-53)
(10-54)
The continuous output C(s) and its modified z-transform are
determined from the composite-flow graph. The composite-flow graph
is obtained by combining the flow graphs of Figs. 10-12a and 10-12b
(In this case, only the significant portion of the original flow graph
is included: see Fig. 10-12c).
From the composite flow graph shown in Fig. 10-12c, we obtain

368
Chap. 10
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
-ST/2
1+G*H*+ (e¯ST/2G)* (e$TH)*
C(s)
=
R* {G[1 + (e¯ST/2G)* (e³T/2H)*] − (e
-
/²G)(e³T/2H)*G*}
+
(10-55)
C(z, m)
=
(e$T/2R)*[(e¯ST/2G)(1 + G*H*) − GH* (e¯ST/2G)*]
1+G*H* + (e¯sT/2G)* (e³T/2H)*
R(z){G(z,m)[1 + Z(e¯sT/²G) Z(e³™/2H)] – G(z) Z(e¯¹²G) Z(e³/2H)}
1 + G(z)H(2) + Z(e¬³™RG) Z(e¹²H)
+
-ST/2
3(e³/2R) {3m(e¯/2G)[1 + G(2)H(≈)] – G(z, m) H(z) Z(e¯¹²G)}
1 + G(z)H(z) + Z(e¯s/2G) Z(e³™/?H)
(10-56)
By similar methods the z-transforms and modified z-transforms of
some other simple closed-loop systems with multirate sampling are
given in Fig. 10-13.
We shall now study the performance of a multirate sampled-data
system and compare it with that of a single-rate sampled system. A
numerical example is given below.
Example 10-3
The block diagram of a multirate sampled-data feedback control system is
shown in Fig. 10-14. The sampling period of the low speed sampler is one
second; the high speed sampler samples N times as fast, N being an integer.
Each sampler is followed by a zero-order hold. The transfer function of the
combination of the first zero-order hold and the compensator is
D(s)
=
1 e-st
s(s + 1)
(T = 1 sec)
(10-57)
Since the zero-order hold following the high-speed sampler holds the sampled
signal only for T/N second, the transfer function for this hold and the plant is
1 e-ST/N
G(s)
= K
$2
(10-58)
From Fig. 10-13a, the closed-loop z-transfer function of the system is
determined
C(z)
R(2)
=
N-1
Σ [ens™/ND(s)] [e¬nsT/NG(s)]
n=0
N-1
1 + Σ Z[ensT/ND(s)] Z[e¬nsT/NG(s)]
(10-59)
n=0
R(s)
E(s)
Zero-order
Dc(s)
LX
C(s)
hold
Zero-order
hold
Go(s)
TIN
D(s)
G(s)
Fig. 10-14 Block diagram of multirate sampled-data system in
Example 10-3.

Sec. 10.1
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING 369
The following z-transforms are determined:
Z
1
-
e-
D(2) = 3 [35 + 1)]
3[+] =
-
ΚΙΝ
G(z) = 3[
3[1]=KIN
-8
-
3[ents/ND(s)] = 23[1].
zZm 5(s+1) m=n/N
2-1
-
0.632
- 0.368
(10-60)
(10-61)
z(1 − e−n/N) + e¯n/N
(z -0.368)
-
0.368
=
KZT
3m[13]
H
-
_m=1-(n/N) - K3mm-1-(n+1)/N
K/N
=
2-1
e-ns/N
- e-s/N)
3 [e™nTxNG(1)] = 3 [K ¤¯**(1 − e)]
(10-62)
(10-63)
The characteristic equation of the system is obtained by setting the denomi-
nator of Eq. (10-59) equal to zero. Therefore,
N-1
1 + Σ Z[ents/ND(s)] Z[e¯nrs/NG(s)] = 0
(10-64)
72=0
which is reduced to
1+D(z)G(z) = 0
(10-65)
when N = 1, and the system becomes a single-rate sampled system.
Substituting Eqs. (10-60) through (10-63) into Eq. (10-64), we have
1 +
0.632K/N
(≈ − 1)(z − 0.368)
-
-
N-1
+
:(1 − e−n/N) + e¯n/N
(z — 0.368)
―
X
----
0.368 K/N
(≈ − 1)
=
0
(10-66)
22 - (1.368 - K +
K+
0.632K
N(1 − e¯¹/N
z +
0.632K
N(1-e-/N)
+ 0.368(1 − K) (10-67)
Equation (10-66) is reduced to
Applying the Schur-Cohn or the modified Routh stability criterion, we obtain
the maximum allowable gain for stability from the following conditions:
(1)
(2)
(3)
K> 0
0.632 +
(0.36
-
0.632
N(1 − e−1/N)
K> 0
2.736 - (1.36
1.264
N(1-e)K>0
(10-68)
(10-69)
(10-70)
When various positive values of N (in this case, N can take on non-
integral values greater than one) are substituted into Eqs. (10-69) and (10-
70), we find that the stability of the system is completely determined by Eqs.
(10-68) and (10-69), and the condition stated in Eq. (10-70) is superfluous.
Thus the maximum allowable gains for various values of N are determined from
K<
0.632
(10-71)
-
0.632
N(1 − e−¹/N)
0.368

370 MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Chap. 10
4
3
Kmax
2
1
1
2 3 4
5 6 7 8
N
9 10
Fig. 10-15 Maximum value of K for stability versus N for the
system in Example 10-3.
and a plot of the maximum K versus N is drawn in Fig. 10-15.
Several pertinent facts on the performance of this multirate sampled-data
system can be drawn from Fig. 10-15. When N = 1, the system has single-
rate sampling, and the maximum allowable gain for system stability is equal
to unity. Also the high-speed sampler tends to make the system more stable.
10.2 VARIABLE-RATE SAMPLING
In one class of sampled-data systems the samplers do not operate
with a uniform rate; that is, the durations between consecutive
sampling pulses are not constant. Such systems are called variable-
rate sampled-data systems. Although the sampling scheme of the
variable-rate samplers may have various forms, the following discus-
sion is limited to systems containing samplers that operate with
periodically variable rates; this type of system is described as the
cyclic-variable rate sampled-data system. As will be shown later,
cyclic-variable rate sampling offers many useful features such as the
improvement of the performance of a sampled-data system and the
time-sharing of equipment in discrete-data systems.
The block diagram of a typical cyclic-variable rate sampled-data
system is shown in Fig. 10-16a. The sampler S operates with a con-
stant sampling rate of 1/T samples per second, whereas the sampler
Se operates with a cyclic-variable rate at instants t = 0, T/N₁, T/N:,
T/N3, . . ., T/Nn; T, (1 + 1/N₁)T, (1 + 1/N½)T, (1 + 1/N3)T,
(1 + 1/N)T; 2T, (2 + 1/N₁)T, (2 + 1/N₂)T, . . ., (2 + 1/Nn)T; 3T,
where N₁> N₂ > N3> . . . >Nn>1. The sampling functions
of S and S. are described in Fig. 10-16b. An examination of Fig.
10-16b reveals that the cyclic-rate sampler Se can be replaced by a
parallel combination of the equivalent skip-sampled samplers used in
preceding sections. However, unlike the case of multirate sampling, the
the delays of the skip-sampled components here are not uniform but
are determined by the values of N1, N2, N3, . . ., Nn. For instance,
the kth skip-sampled sampler consists of a basic sampler with sampling

Sec. 10.2
371
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Cyclic-variable
rate sampler
R(s)
OE(S)X
E(s)
S
Zero-order
hold
Dc(s)
Zero-order
C(s)
Sc hold
Gc(s)
Do(s)
O
T T
N₁ N₂
हान
N3
흐
​(a)
・Gk(s)⋅
k=0,1,2,...n
T
27
T
(1+)
1 T
)T(1+ IT 2T (2 + 1/1)T
(2+
t
(1 + 1 ) T
N2
(b)
Fig. 10-16 (a) Block diagram of cyclic-rate sampled-data system.
(b) Top: Sampling function of sampler S. Bottom: Sampling
function of cyclic sampler Sc.
Хо
T
eTs/N₁
Х1
e-Ts/N
T
ets/N2 X2 X2 e-TS/N2
Sc
(a)
eTs/Nk
eTs/Nn
e-Ts/Nk
e-Ts/Nn
T
(b)
Fig. 10-17 (a) Cyclic-variable rate sampler. (b) Equivalent skip-
sampled flow graph model of a cyclic-variable rate sampler.

372 MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Chap. 10
Ts
period T; the sampler is preceded by a time advance unit with trans-
fer function eN and followed by a time delay unit with transfer
function e-T/N. The equivalent skip-sampled flow graph model of a
cyclic-variable rate sampler is now constructed in Fig. 10-17, and the
equivalent flow graph of the sampled-data system of Fig. 10-16a is
drawn in Fig. 10-18. The transfer function of the combination of
the zero-order hold following the single-rate sampler S and D(s) is
designated as Do(s); therefore,
Do
охо
Go
e-Ts/N₁G₁
eTs/N₁Do
ох,
e-Ts/N2G₂
ets/N2 Do
OX2
X2
C
@Ts/Nk G
eTs/NkDo
OX
e-Ts/NnGo
eTs/NoDo
-1
Fig. 10-18 Equivalent signal flow graph with skip-sampled samplers
of sampled-data system of Fig. 10-16a.
-T's
Do(s) = 1 − e¯™ D(s)
S
·
(10-72)
However, since the zero-order hold holds a sampled pulse signal until
the next pulse comes along, the transfer functions of the zero-order
holds that follow all the equivalent samplers in Fig. 10-18 are neces-
sarily different. For instance, the transfer function of the zero-order
hold that follows the kth skip-sampled sampler is
1- exp(-Ts (N... -))
1
1
N
+1
(10-73)
for k
=
2, 3,
n - 1.
..."
S
Therefore, with reference to Fig. 10-18, we have
Go(s)
1
-TS'Ni
-----
e
=
G(s)
S
(10-74)

Sec. 10.2
373
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
R(s)
E(s)
Zero-order
hold
G(s)
C(s)
Sc
Cyclic-rate
sampler
(a)
K
S+1
| | || | ↓↓
T T (1+1)7 27
e
TS/N
(b)
(2+1)7 37 (3+ 1)T
e-Ts/NG₁
Go
Gols) = 1-e TSIN
Ts/N
-G(s)
S
G₁(s) =
1-e-Ts(1-4)
-G(s)
S
(c)
Go
G
-(e
lets/NG)
(e
-TS/NG₁
-le
Ts/NGC
TS/NR)
Gets/N
Go
(d)
Fig. 10-19 (a) Cyclic-variable rate sampled-data system for
Example 10-4. (b) Sampling function of cyclic-variable rate
sampler. (c) Equivalent signal flow graph of cyclic-variable
sampled-data system with skip-sampled samplers. (d) Composite
signal flow graph of the cyclic-rate sampled-data system of (a).

374
Chap. 10
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
G₁(s)
=
1
-
-
exp[-T3 (N, - N)] 6(3)
Ts
S
2
Ñ‚
Gn(s)
1
-
-
-Ts[1-(1/N)]
·G(s)
S
G(s)
(10-75)
(10-76)
It follows that the z-transform and the modified z-transform of the
system output are given by
C(x) =
and
C(z, m)
=
respectively.
Go(≈)Do(x) + Ž Z[e™/N•Do(s)] }[e¬™«/N+Gx(s)]
k=1
77
1 + Go(z) Do(z) + Σ Z[e™/Nx Do(s)] Z[e=™/NxGx(s)]
72
Do(z)Go(z, m) + Σ Z[e™/¹¹ Do(s)] Z[e¯™/¹¹Gx(s)]
n
1 + Go(x)Do(x) + Σ Z[e™/+Do(s)] }[e¯™/+Gx(s)]
R(z)
(10-77)
R(x)
(10-78)
In order to illustrate the technique of analysis and the character-
istics of sampled-data systems with cyclic-variable rate samplers, two
numerical examples are given below.
Example 10-4
Consider the simple cyclic-variable rate sampled-data system shown in
Fig. 10-19a. Assume that the sampler operates at instants of t = 0, T/N, T,
(1 + 1/N)T, 2T, (2 + 1/N)T, 3T, . . ., (k + 1/N)T, (k + 1)T, . . ., where
N is a positive number greater than unity and T is equal to one second.
The sampling function of the sampler is depicted in Fig. 10-19b.
The purposes of this example are to determine the optimum value of N
for which the system is most stable and to show the effects of the variations
of N on the system performance.
The equivalent signal flow graph of the system is now depicted in Fig.
10-19c. The cyclic-rate sampler is decomposed into two basic samplers opera-
ting in synchronism with a sampling period of one second. The equivalent
sampler in the first branch is not accompanied by any advance and delay
units; the sampler in the second branch is preceded by an advance unit with
transfer function eTsN and followed by a delay unit with transfer function
e-TSN. Since the sampler in the second branch operates at the instants t = T/N,
(1 + 1/N)T, (2 + 1/N)T, . . ., (k + 1/N)T, . . ., the transfer functions of
the zero-order holds in the two branches are different and are given by
1-e-Ts, N
S
(10-79)

Sec. 10.2
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING 375
and
1
e-Ts[1-(1/N)]
S
(10-80)
respectively. The hold device in the first branch holds the output of the basic
sampler for only the duration of T/N second, whereas the hold device of the
second branch holds the corresponding basic sampler output for the remaining
time (1 - 1/N)T during the interval of T seconds. Therefore, with reference
to Fig. 10-19c,
and
-
Go(s)
1 -TS/N
=
G(s)
S
1
--
-Ts[1-(1/N)]
G₁(s)
=
G(s)
S
(10-81)
(10-82)
The z-transform and the modified z-transform of the system output can be
determined by use of the composite signal flow graph technique. In Fig.
10-19c if we regard R, X*, X* as input node variables and Xo, X1, C as
output node variables and write the starred transforms of the output variables
as functions of the input variables, we have
X = R* – Gỗ X* – (e-T%NG)*X*
-
X* G*
(10-83)
X* = (eT³/NR)* − (eTs/NG。)*X* – G* X*
(10-84)
C* = G* X + (e-7s/NG,)*X*
(10-85)
C = GX* + (e-T/NG,)*X*
(10-86)
The composite signal flow graph of the system is constructed from these four
equations as shown in Fig. 10-19d. The z-transform and the modified z-trans-
form of the system output are readily determined from the composite signal
graph as
C(z)
and
C(z, m)
=
=
+ –
{G。(≈)[1 + G₁(≈)] − Z[e™³/NGo(s)] Z[e¯™³/NG,(s)]} R(z)
1 +G。(≈) + G¸(≈) — Z[e™ NGo(s)] Z[e¯™s NG₁(s)] + Go(≈)G,(≈)
+
-
Z[e™s/NR(s)]{[1 + Go(≈)] Z[e=™³/NG₁(s)] − Z[e™³/NG,(s)]Go(z)}
1 + G。(≈) + G₁(≈) — Z[e™³/NGo(s)] Z[e¯™s/NG₁(s)] + Go(≈)G,(≈)
(10-87)
{[1 + G₁(≈)]R(≈) — Z[e™s/NR(s)] Z[e¯Ts/NG₁(s)]}G。(z, m)
N
1 + G。(≈) + G₁(≈) — Z[e™³/NGo(s)] Z[e¯™³ ÑG₁(s)] + Go(z)G,(≈)
+
-
{[1 + Go(z)] Z[e™s NR(s)] – 3[es/Go(s) (R≈)}]}m[e¯™s/NG₁(5)]
1 + G。(≈) + G₁(≈) — Z[e™s NGo(s)] Z[e¯™³/NG₁(s)] + Go(≈)G,(≈)
(10-88)
The characteristic equation of the system is obtained by setting the denomi-
nator of Eq. (10-87) or Eq. (10-88) equal to zero. Thus
-
1 + Go(≈) + G₁(≈) — Z[ets, Go(s)] Z[¯e™s/NG,(s)] + Go(≈) G₁(≈) = 0 (10-89)
Making use of the relationships of Eqs. (10-41) through (10-44), we obtain
the following z-transforms of the system:
-
e-TsN
-e
-Ts N
Go(≈) = 3[¹
3 [1; ]-
(G(s)] = 3[K(
S
s(s + 1)
I/N
0.368(e 1)
༤ 0.368
(10-90)

376
Chap. 10
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
-Ts[1-(1/N)]
e
G₁(z) = 3
S
5(s)] = 3[
-
K(1 − e−Ts[l−(1/N)])]
-
s(s + 1)
K(e¯¹/N — 0.368)
-
=
3 [e74/NGo(s) ] = 3 [ K(eT/N
s(s + 1)
---
3[e- *G, (1)] = [(e"].
For a unit-step displacement input,
s(s + 1)
1)
[
Kz(1e-1/N)
0.368
(10-91)
=
z- 0.368
(10-92)
-
K(1 − e¹/N−1)
=
2 -0.368
(10-93)
and
R(z) = = = 1
-
3[ers/NR(s)]
=
z=1
(10-94)
(10-95)
Substituting Eqs. (10-90) through (10-93) into Eq. (10-89) and simplify.
ing, we obtain the characteristic equation
(≈ 0.368) [≈ - (1.368K + 0.736K + 0.368)
-
+ (0.368e/+el/N) (K + 1)K] = 0
(10-96)
The characteristic equation has a fixed root at +0.368 and a variable root
whose location depends on the values of N and K. For the closed-loop cyclic-
rate sampled-data system to be stable, the roots of the characteristic equation
must lie inside the unit circle of the z-plane. Therefore, for stability the values
of K and N must satisfy the following condition:
|(1.368K² + 0.736K + 0.368) — (0.368e¹N + e¯¹/N)(K + 1)K| <1 (10-97)
Separating the terms containing K from the terms containing N, the above
condition is met when
and
0.368eN + e-/N>
0.368(1 + K) + (K − 1)
K
0.368e/N +e-1/N
0.368(1+K)² + K² + 1
(K + 1)K
(10-98)
(10-99)
The stability boundary curvest for the system are plotted from Eqs. (10-
98) and (10-99) in Fig. 10-20. Observe that when the sampler operates at
a uniform rate of one sample per second (T = 1 sec), the maximum gain
for stability is equal to 2.16; when the rate of the uniform sampling is in-
creased to two samples per second (T = 0.5 sec or N = 2), the marginal
value of K for stability is 4.1. The effect of the cyclic sampling is clearly
demonstrated by the stability boundary curves. For both large and small
values of N, the closed-loop system with cyclic sampling is stable even for
very high gains. For instance, when 1/N equals 0.1 or 0.9, the system is
stable for values of K between 31.75 and 35.1 (of course the sensitivity of the
system stability with respect to the variation in system gain K is poor).
If we substitute Eqs. (10-90) through (10-95) into Eq. (10-87) and simplify,
the z-transform of the system output is obtained as
† J. T. Tou, “Multiple Variable-rate Discrete-data Control Systems," Proceedings of
International Automatic Control Conference, Butterworth Publications, Moscow, 1960.

Sec. 10.2
377
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
30

25
20
K
15
10
5
Unstable region
Unstable region
Kmax Values of K for deadbeat performance
Kmin
Unstable
region
Kmin
Stable region
Kmin
우
​-5
O
O.I
0.2 0.3
C(z)
=
'Unstable region
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
1/N
Fig. 10-20 Stability boundary curves for the cyclic-rate sampled-
data system in Example 10-4.
Kz[(0.368e/N+e-1/N 1.368) K+ 0.632]
— -
(≈ − 1)[≈ – (1.368K² + 0.736K + 0.368) + (0.368e¹/ + e¯¹/N)(K² + K)]
(10-100)
If deadbeat performance is to be achieved, the characteristic equation of the
system should be of the form: "0. Therefore, to achieve deadbeat per-
formance, the root of the characteristic equation must be located at the origin
in the z-plane; that is,
—
1.368K2 +0.736K+ 0.368 (0.368e/N + e-/N) (K² + K) = 0 (10-101)
The values of K for deadbeat responses when 1/N takes on various values
between zero and unity are plotted in Fig. 10-20. For a given value of N
V/4
NIN
Ο Ι
T
2T
3T
4T t
N
T
system of Example 10-4.
N
2T
3T
Fig. 10-21 Two cyclic sampling schemes of the sampled-data
4T
t

378 MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Chap. 10
(except for N = 2), two possible values of K will give rise to a deadbeat
performance. However, the analysis of the system thus far made is based on
the z-transformation, and a deadbeat response described at the basic sampling
instants t = 0, T, 2T, . . . does not necessarily mean that the actual continu-
ous output of the system is deadbeat. We shall show that although replacing
1/N by (11/N) in Eq. (10-100) does not alter the z-transform of the system
and thus the system outputs for the two cyclic sampling schemes of Fig. 10-21
at the basic sampling instants of t = 0, T, 2T, . . . are identical, the actual
continuous outputs of the two cases are not the same. We shall use Eq. (10-
88), the modified z-transform of the system output, to determine the system
response in between the basic sampling instants. In order to use Eq. (10–88),
the modified z-transforms of Go(s) and e-TS/NG,(s) must be determined. From
the definition of the modified z-transform, we have
-
Go(≈, m) = 3m [K(1 − e−1/N)
2
Ts
K(e-TS/N
K(1 − e¯Ts/N)
emts
• (10-102)
[K(
13 [² 3(s + 1)
S
3m[e-TV/NG, 3m
13
[K(e-TUN
K(e¯Ts/N e¯Ts)
s(s+1)
(10-103)
Ju[e™™*G, (3)] = 3«[K(erty *=9")] = = 3 [K (ot;)"]
s(s+1)
The evaluation of the two modified z-transform functions given above is
simple when the values of the output response at t = (k+1/N)T for k = 0,
1, 2, . . . are desired. For this case, we set m = 1/N, and Eqs. (10-102) and
(10-103) become
--
0.368
Go(≈, m) = 2-1
= 2-1
3 [K (
3[K(1
K(eT/N1)
s(s + 1)
K(1 - e-V/N)
===¹ Z[ets/Go(s)]
=
༤
s(s+1)
]
3m[e-T/NG₁(s)]
-Ts[1-
=
-
(10-104)
K(e-¹/N — 0.368)
(z -0.368)
(10-105)
Substituting Eq. (10-104) and Eq. (10-105) into Eq. (10-88), we have the
modified z-transform of the system output (m = 1/N) for deadbeat performance.
C(z, 1/N) =
K
(≈ − 1)(≈ − 0.368)
--
--
[z − 0.368(1 + K)
-
− K + K(e¹/N−¹ + e¯¹/N)](1 − e−¹/N) + [≈(1 − K) + zKe˜¼/N
-0.368(K + 1) + KeN-]≈¯¹(e-1/- 0.368)
After simplification, the last equation is reduced to
(10-106)
C(z, 1/N) =
༧
K
-
-
K₁)
1) [(1 − e−1/³) + 2−1
1
-
1 +
+ 1)] (10-107)
K+1
By long division the modified z-transform of the system output at the
sampling instants t = (k + 1/N)T, (k = 0, 1, 2,
·
.) is
C(≈, 1/N) = K(1 − e−1/N) ≈¯¹ +
-
K
K+ 1
(¢7? + ལྤ་
3
+ +
.)
(10-108)
Using Eq. (10-101) or Eq. (10-22), we can predict by the z-transform
method that deadbeat performance of the system is possible for K = 4 when

Sec. 10.2
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING 379
1/N equals 0.223 or 0.777. Substituting 1/N = 0.223 and K = 4 into Eq. (10-
108), we have
C(z, 0.223) = 0.821 +0.82-2 + 0.82-3 +
which is a deadbeat response. However, for 1/N
(10-108) becomes.
(10-109)
=
0.777 and K = 4, Eq.
C(z, 0.777)
=
€1.2621+0.82-2 + 0.8z¯³ +
3
(10-110)
Since the response now has an overshoot of 1.26, it is not deadbeat. For
K = 10 and 1/N = 0.0953 the deadbeat response of the system is described
by the following modified z-transform:
1/N=0.223
1/N=0.777
Sampling functions
3
c(1)
2.16
2
K=4
m=1/N=0.777
0.8
m=1/N=0.223
о 0.223
0.777 1
2
c(1)
7
6
5
4
3
2
6
m=1/N=0.9047
m=1/N=0.0953
K=10
0.91
1/N=0.0953
1/N=0.9047
O 0.0953
0.9047 1
2
Fig. 10-22 Output step responses of cyclic-rate sampled-data
system of Example 10-4.
31
31

380
Chap. 10
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
But for K
=
C(z, 0.0953) = 0.91z¹ +0.912-2 +0.912-³ +
=
(10-111)
10 and 1/N 0.9047, the modified z-transform of the system
output for m = 0.9047 is
C(z, 0.9047) = 6≈‍¹ + 0.91≈¯² + 0.91%˜³ +
(10-112)
and the maximum overshoot is 600 percent. The output responses of the
system for the two cases calculated above are depicted in Fig. 10-22.
As can be shown in a similar manner, true deadbeat response for this
system with cyclic sampling is possible only for 0 < 1/N <0.5.
Example 10-5
Let us consider the feedback control system with cyclic sampling shown
in Fig. 10-16a. We assume that the sampler operates with the same cyclic
scheme as that shown in Fig. 10-19b and that the sampling period is one
second. As will be demonstrated in this example, an optimum value of 1N
exists at which the maximum allowable gain for system stability reaches its
peak value. When 1/N is increased toward unity or is decreased toward zero,
the maximum allowable gain for stability is decreased.
The transfer functions of the controller D(s) and the fixed elements of
the system are given by
and
D(s)
=
1
S+ 1
G(s) = K/s²
(10-113)
(10-114)
respectively. With reference to Eq. (10-77), the z-transform of the system
output is given by
C(z) =
Go(z) Do(2) + [eTsN Do(s)] [e-T/NG₁(s)]
1+ Do(2)Go(≈) + Z[e™s N Do(s)]Z [e˜™ NG₁(s)]
in which the following z-transforms are given by
N
1
D。(≈) = Z 3
Go() =
-
e
T's
s(s + 1)
-e
Ts
=
= = =
3[K (1 - p)]
1
(1-e-Ts)
-
R() (10-115)
-
0.632
z 0.368)
(10-116)
K
(≈ − 1)N
(10-117)
❖ — 0.368
) + 6-1/x
e¯l/N 0.368
(10-118)
(10-119)
3 [c™* * Do(s)] = 3 [ c™* * (1+=+T) ] = = (1 − e−
N
е
3[e¯**G, (4)] = 3[Ke-7x (1 = e--(1)] K(1-1/N)
ך2
-
Substituting Eqs. (10-116) through (10-119) into Eq. (10-115) yields the
z-transform of the system output as
C(z) =
K[(1 − )(1-e)x+(1-e)+e-0.368
N
K
N
'+[K(1 − 1 ) (1 − e−¹³ ³) − 1.368]≈ + √ (1 − e−¹³) +0.368(1 − K) + Ke¯¹´~
-
-R()
(10-120)

Sec. 10.2
381
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
The characteristic equation of the system is
≈² + K(1 − 1/N)(1 − e¯¹/N)z — 1.368% +
-
K
N
-
(1 − e¯/N)
(10-121)
+ 0.368(1K) + Ke¯/N = 0
Applying the Schur-Cohn stability criterion to the last equation, we obtain
the following inequalities:
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.632
K<
1/N(1 -
-
e¯¹/N) − 0.368 + e
K> 0
-1.368
K>
1/N(1 − e¯/)
0.684
(10-122)
(10-123)
(10-124)
Since the right-hand side of Eq. (10-124) is always negative for 0 <1/N≤ 1,
the maximum and the minimum allowable gains for stability are given by
Eqs. (10-122) and (10-123), respectively. The stability boundaries for this
system are plotted in Fig. 10-23. Observe that from the stability point of
Unstable region
1.6
1.44
1.4
Kmax
1.2
1.0
K 0.8
0.6-
Stable region
0.4-
0.2
Kmin
O 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
1/N
Unstable region
Fig. 10-23 Stability boundary curves for the cyclic-rate sampled-
data system of Example 10-5.
view, an optimum value of 1/N is equal to 0.44, since the maximum allowable
gain reaches a peak of 1.44 under this condition. For a uniform sampling
with sampling period of one second (N = 1), the maximum allowable gain
for stability is 1.0.
For this system to have deadbeat performance, the characteristic equation
of the system must be of the form 2 = 0. Therefore, in Eq. (10-121), the
coefficients of z and 2° must vanish simultaneously with
K(11/N) (1 e-/N) - 1.368 = 0
(10-125)
K
and
-
N
(1 − e¯/) + 0.368(1 − K) + Ke˜¼² = 0
(10-126)

382 MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Chap. 10
However, we can show that Eqs. (10-125) and (10–126) cannot simultaneously
be equal to zero for 0 <1/N <1; hence deadbeat performance cannot be
obtained for this system with the specific cyclic sampling function used.
10.3 STATE VARIABLES AND TRANSITION EQUATIONS
OF MULTIRATE AND SKIP-SAMPLED SYSTEMS
The state variable and state transition methods introduced in
Sec. 5.6 can readily be used to study sampled-data systems with
multirate- or variable-rate sampling. We shall demonstrate that the
state transition equations of a system with multirate- or variable-
rate sampling can be written out directly from the transition flow
graph in much the same way as those for a system with uniform-
rate sampling.
1. Cyclic Sampling
...9
1
1
The operation of a cyclic-rate sampler is described by the pulse-
trains shown in Fig. 10-16b or Fig. 10-19b. The sampling operation
of the cyclic sampler is assumed to take place at the instants_t =
kT, kT/N₁, kT/N2, kT/N3, . kT/Nn, (k + 1)T, T + kT/N₁, .
or t = kT, kT + T₁, kT + T₁ + T2, kT + T₁ + T₂+ T3, . . ., (k +
1)T, (k + 1)T + T₁, ...; where the N's are positive numbers greater
than one, T1, T2, . . . are all less than T. Referring to Eq. (5-182)
we may write the transition equation of a uniform-rate sampling
system during the time interval to <t<t。 +7, where 0 <T<T, as
x(t) = (t t。) x(to) + ✪(t − t。)r(to)
-
(10-127)
Since Eq. (10-127) is valid for any between 0 and T, it may be
applied to the cyclic-rate sampling system. For instance, at t = kT +
T₁, Eq. (10-127) becomes
x[(kT + T₁)] = ¥(T₁)x(kT) + ✪(T₁)r(kT)
(10-128)
Similarly, at the very next sampling instant t = kT + T₁ + T2; Eq.
(10-127) reads
x[(kT+T₁ + T₂)] = ¥(T₂)x(kT + T₁) + ✪(T₂) r(kT + T₁)
1
2
(10-129)
In general, if T = T₁ + T₂ + T3 + . . . + T, at t = kT + T₁ + T:
Tq-1 < (k + 1)T, Eq. (10-127) is written
+ T3 +
x(kT + T. +T,+...+ Ta-1)
=
1
(T,-1)x(kT +T, +T, + . . . Ta-2)
1
+ ✪(Tq-1) r(kT + T₁ + T½ +
1
...Tq-2) (10-130)

Sec. 10.3
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING 383
and at t = kT + T we have
x[(k + 1)T] = Y(Tg)x(kT + T₁ + T₂+ ... + Tq-1)
+ ✪(Tq)r(kT + T₁ + T₂ + . . . + Tq-1) (10-131)
1
By substituting Eq. (10-128) into Eq. (10-129) and so on, we see
that Eq. (10-131) can be written as
x[(k+1)T] = (T,)Y(T.-)...(T,)(T)x(kT)
Example 10-6
+Y(Ta)Y(Tq-1)
...
V(T)O(T)r(kT)
+ Y(T,)Y(Tq-1) . . . ¥(T3)✪(T₂)r(kT + T₁)
...
+ Y(T,)Y(Tq-1) . . . ¥(T₁)✪(T3) r(kT+T₁+ T₂)
+ ... + (Tg)✪(Tq-1) r(kT + T₁ + T₂+ ..
1
2
+ Tq-2)+(Tg) r(kT + T₁ + T₂+ ... + Tq-1)
2
(10-132)
Consider the system shown in Fig. 10-19. Assuming that G(s) = 1/s(s + 1),
the sampler closes at instants t = kT, kT + T₁, (k + 1)T, (k + 1)T + T₁, . . .,
where 0 < T₁ <T.
The state transition flow graph of the linear elements described by G(s)
has been shown in Fig. 5-31a. During the time interval kT <t≤ kT + T₁,
the transition flow graph of the over-all system is shown in Fig. 5-31b. The
state transition equations are given by Eqs. (5-162) and (5-163). At t =
kTT, t-to= =
T₁; these two transition equations become
x₁[(kT+ T₁)] = (2 T₁e T₁)x, (kT) + (1 − e−¹¹) xq(kT)
– –
+(T₁-1+e-T₁)r(kT)
(10-133)
r(KT)

1-e-T₁
T₁-1+e-T₁
X2(KT)
X1(KT)
1-e-T
e-T
2-T₁-e-T₁
-1+e-T₁
x2(KT+T₁)
xq(KT+T₁)
11
Ox₂ (KT +T₁+)
Ox₁(KT+T₁*),
1
h(kT+T₁+)
S-1
5-1
S-1
S-1
r(kT+T₁)
S-1
H(s)
X2(s)
X₁(s)
<- 1
Fig. 10-24 Transition flow graph of cyclic-rate sampled-data
system in Example 10-6.

384
Chap. 10
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
x2[(kT+ T₂)] = − (1 − e¯) x₁(kT) + e¯¹¹x₂(kT)
-
–
+ (1 − e) r(kT)
(10-134)
Therefore, x₁(kT + T₁) and x2(kT + T₂) become the initial conditions to the
next transition interval T, < t ≤ (k + 1) T. The transition flow graph of the
over-all system during T, <t≤ (k + 1)T is constructed in Fig. 10-24. The
construction of the transition flow graph is based on Eqs. (10-133) and (10–
134), as well as the transition equations:
h(kT + T†) = r(kT + T₁) − x₁(kT + T₁)
x (kT + T) = x (kT + T)
(10-135)
(10-136)
(10-137)
x²(kT + T†) = x²(kT + T,)
From the transition flow graph of Fig. 10-24, the following equations are
written using Mason's formula and taking the inverse Laplace transformation:
x(t) = {[2 (t − T₁) — e-t-T₁)](2 T₁ - e-T₁) + (−1 + e-T₁)
−
Ꭲ
-
—
-
-
1
-
× [1 − e−(t-T₁)]}x,(kT) + {[2 − (t − T₁) − e−(t-T₁)](1 − e−T₁)
+e-[1-e-Ti)]}x₂(kT) + {[2 (t T₁) e--T)](T₁ − 1 + e-T₁)
+ (1 − e¯)[1 − e−α-T1)]}r(kT) + [(t − T₁) − 1 + e¯-T) ]r(kT + T₁)
(10-138)
-
---
x(t) = {e--T) (-1+ e-T) (2 T₁e")[1 - e--T)]}x,(kT)
{e¯ll-T₁) −
е
-
-
-e
+ {e-Te--T₁) − (1 − e)[1 − e−−T¹)]}x₂(kT) + {(1 − e−i) e¯-T₁)
- (T₁ −1 + e¯)[1 - e--T]}r(kT) + [1 − e−-T)]r(kT + T₁)
-
(10-139)
The transition equations describing the state variables at the sampling instants
are obtained by substituting t = kT + T into Eqs. (10-138) and (10-139).
Cyclic-rote
sampler
R
z. o. h.
S
S
st
ཁོ་
X5
D(s)
z.o.h. G(s)
Sc
X4
X3
x2
Χη
(a)
кт
(k+1)T
(K+2)T
(k+3)T
(K+4)T
Sc
T₁
T₁
T₁
T₁
(k+2)T
кт
KT + T₁ (k+1)T (k+1)T+T₁
(k+2)T+T₁
(b)
Fig. 10-25 Cyclic-rate sampled-data system. (a) Block diagram.
(b) Sampling schemes.

Sec. 10.3
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING 385
D(s)
9x3 (10)
G(s)
x2(1019
s-1
X5(5)
X4(s)
x3(5)
X2(5)
X₁(s)
-1
-1
(a)
x4(KT)
X2 (KT)0
Xa(KT)
xa (KT)
A H
1
s-1
r(KT) X5 (KT+)
X5(s)
X4(s) x3(KT+) Xz(s)
X2(s) X₁(s)
-1
-1
(b)

-(1-e)
1-e-T
X4(KT)
T₁-1+e¯T₁
X2(KT)
(KT)
eT
1-e-T
_x₁(KT+T₁)
X2(KT+T₁)
1-e-T
8x3(KT+T₁)
Xq(KT+T₁*)9
5-1
`xq (KT + T₁)
X2(KT+T+)
-x₁ (KT+T₁₂+)
7)
X5(KT+T₁*) X5(s)
X4(s)
X5(KT+T₁)
-1
X3(s)
X2(s) X₁(s)
X3(KT+T₁*)
(c)
-1
Fig. 10-26 Transition flow graphs of cyclic-rate sampled system
in Example 10-7.

386 MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Chap. 10
Example 10-7
As another example, let us consider the cyclic-rate sampled-data system
shown in Fig. 10-25a. The sampling schemes of the samplers are shown in
Fig. 10-25b. The transfer functions of the system are given as
D(s) = 1/(s + 1) and G(s) = 1/s(s + 1)
The state variables of the system are assigned as shown in Fig. 10-25a, where
variables X1, X2,
and x are state variables of the continuous dynamic elements
and x and x are outputs of the sample-and-hold units. The transition flow
graphs of the continuous dynamic elements G(s) and D(s) are shown in Fig.
10-26a. At t = to = kT, both samplers operate; the following transition equa-
tions are written:
x (kT*) = x (kT)
x2(kT+) = x2(kT)
=
xs(kT+) = x(kT)
z (kT+) = x(T)
x5(kT+) = r(kT) − x₁(kT)
-
(10-140)
(10-141)
(10-142)
(10-143)
(10-144)
Through the use of these transition equations, the transition flow graph of
the over-all system during the time interval kT <t≤T₁ is drawn in Fig.
10-26b. Applying Mason's gain formula to the flow graph of Fig. 10-26b, we
can write the following equations:
1
1
(AT)+G+I)(T)
(s
X₁(s) = — x,(kT) +
s(5 ²+1) æ¤2(kT′) + 5²(5 + 1) ¤, (kT)
(10-145)
1
1
X₂(s) = 5 + 1 x2(kT) +
s(5 + 1) x (kT)
(10-146)
X,(3) ====,(AT)
(10-147)
1
X₁(5) = − 5(5 + 1)
Jx₁(kT) + 5 + 1 ¤, (kT)
1
+
s(s + 1) r(kT) (10–148)
(10-149)
S
1
s+
Xs(s) = −1 x,(kT) + ±r(kT)
Taking the inverse Laplace transform of the last five equations, we have
at t = kT + T₁,
-
x₁(kT + T₁) = x₁(kT) + (1 − e−¹¹) x2(kT) + (T₁ − 1 + e¯¹¹) x¸(kT) (10-150)
x½(kT + T₁) = e¯T¹x₂(kT) + (1 − e−™¹)x(kT)
x3(kT + T₁) = x₁(kT)
-
-
(10-151)
(10-152)
x₁(kT + T₁) = − (1 − e−¹¹)x, (kT) + e¯¹¹x¸(kT) + (1 − e¯T) r(kT) (10-153)
xs (kT+T₁) = −x₁(kT) + r(kT)
(10-154)
At t = kT + T₁, the cyclic-rate sampler closes, but the uniform-rate sampler
is open. The following transition equations are written:

Sec. 10.3
387
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
x₁(kT + T†) = x₁(kT + T₁)
(10-155)
x₂(kT+T+) = x₂(kT + T₁)
(10-156)
x3(kT + T†) = x¸(kT + T₁)
(10-157)
x₁(kT+T+) = x₁(kT + T₁)
(10-158)
(10-159)
xs(kT+T+) = x5(kT + T₁)
Now, the transition flow graph of the system during the time interval
kT + T₁ <t≤ (k + 1)T is constructed by use of Eqs. (10-150) through (10-
159) and the flow graphs of Fig. 10-26a. The complete transition flow graph
is shown in Fig. 10-26c. The transition equations are written by inspection
from Fig. 10-26c.
-
e
X,(s) = − x,(kT') + [¹ −6″ + (171) ] = (47)
+
S
-
· [T₁ = 1 + ²²
e-T
S
X;(3) = ('7', ±, (kT') +
5+1
-e
-T₁
S
S
s(s +
e-Ti
x2(kT)
6 + 1) ] = (4T) + 1 ( + 1) + (AT)
s²(s
XA
1- e-T
s² (s +
" + (+1)]=,&T) + }; +T)
X,(s) = − (1 − e´¹¹) x,(kT) + x.(kT) + 1—²²r(kT)
+
1
-e
+
1)
+
[
¹
1
s+
;-;
=
1
---
s(s 1)]x,(kT)
-
1
+
+
s+ 1.
s(3 + 1) ]r(kT)
X5(s)
=
- 1x₁(kT)
¿T) +
· x₁(kT) + — r(kT)
S
S
X₁(s)
S
-e
S
(10-160)
1- e-T
s(s 1)
(4T)
(10-161)
(10-162)
x(kT
(10-163)
(10-164)
X,(1) = [ − (1 − ˜^ ) - ( + 1) ] x,(4T) + [1 − +1)]*(*T)
S
s+1
The transition equations describing the state variables during the time interval
kT+T₁ <t≤ (k + 1)T are obtained by taking the inverse Laplace transform
of the last five equations.
2. Nonsynchronous Sampling
A sampled-data system with nonsynchronized samplers is shown
in Fig. 10-27. As depicted in Fig. 10-27, the two samplers do not
operate at the same instants. The state transition technique is applied
to this system in a manner similar to that in which it was applied
to the cyclic sampling case. First, the transition equations at t = to
= kT immediately after the operation of S, are written to describe
the initial conditions on the state variables x1, x2, x3, and x₁. The
state transition flow graph for the time interval kT <t< kT + T₁
is drawn using these transition equations and connecting the flow
graphs of the continuous dynamic elements. The transition equations

388 MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Chap. 10
S₁
S2
KT
KT+T
(k+1)T
KT+T+T₁
r(t)
X3
z. o. h.
S₁
(k+2)T
-S
(k+2)T+T₁
x2
1
S+1
X4
z. o. h.
S₂
Г
Fig. 10-27 Sampled-data control system with nonsynchronized
samplers.
1
for the time interval kT < t < kT + T₁ are written from the transi-
tion flow graph. At t = kT + T₁, the sampler S, operates, but S
does not. The same procedure described above is repeated until the
final state transition flow graph and equations at kT + T₁<t<
(k+1)T are obtained. The state transition equations at t = (k+1)T
are
xi[(k+1)T] = x(kT) – Tr(kT) + Tr(kT)
(10-165)
x2[(k + 1)T] = [1 − e¯‹T-™¹)]x₁(kT) + [e¯” — T₁(1 − e¯(T-T₁))]x₂(kT)
(10-166)
xs[(k + 1)T] = -x(kT) +r(kT)
(10-167)
x₁[(k + 1)T] = x₁(kT) – T₁x₂(kT) + T₁r(kT)
-
(10-168)
9x₁(10)
Ox₁(10)
5-1
생이
​(to) 1
x3(10)
X3(5)
X₁(5)
-14
1
x2(10)
x2(10) X2(s)
-1
X₁(s)=C(s)
X4(s)
×4(10)
xa(10)
to = kT < t < (k + 1)T
Fig. 10-28 State transition flow graph for the sampled-data
system with nonsynchronized samplers shown in Fig. 10-27.

Sec. 10.3
389
MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
((KT) 1
-14
x3(KT+T₁)
T
Ox₁ (KT)
1
X₁(KT+T₁)
5-1
15-1
5-1
1
X3(5)
X₁(5)
X₁(s)=C(s)
1
-T₁
5-1
5-1
X2(KT)
5-1
x2(KT+T₁*) X2(5)
X2(KT+T₁)
X4(s) xa(KT+T₁*)
-1
1-e¯¯₁
1
X4(KT) X4 (KT+T₁)
t> (k+1)T
Fig. 10-29 State transition flow graph for the sampled-data system
with nonsynchronized samplers shown in Fig. 10-27.
The details of this illustrative example are left for the readers to
carry out as an exercise.
Although only the cyclic sampling and the nonsynchronous
sampling are considered in this section, we can see from the techniques
demonstrated in the preceding examples that the state transition
method can be applied to other sampling schemes such as multirate,
multiorder, and noninstantaneous.
REFERENCES
Barker, R. H., "The Theory of Pulse-Monitored Servo And Their Use for
Prediction," Report No. 1046, Signals Research and Development Establish-
ment, Christchurch, England, November 1950.
Bergen, A. R., and Ragazzini, J. R., "Sampled-Data Processing Techniques
For Feedback Control Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., Part 2, November 1954,
pp. 236-244.
Bertram, J. E., "Factors in the Design of Digital Controller for Sampled-Data
Feedback Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 75, Part 2, July 1956, pp. 151–159.
Cruz, J. B. Jr., "Sensitivity Considerations for Time-Varying Sampled-Data
Feedback Systems," I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-6, May
228-236.
1961,
pp.

390 MULTIRATE AND SKIP SAMPLING
Chap. 10
Desoer, C. A., and Wing, J., "A Minimal Time Discrete System," I. R. E.
Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-6, May 1961, pp. 111-125.
Horowitz, I. M., "The Sensitivity Problem in Sampled-Data Feedback Systems,"
I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-6, September 1961, pp. 251–259.
Jury, E. I., and Schroeder, W., "Discrete Compensation of Sampled-Data and
Continuous Control Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 76, Part 2, 1957.
Kalman, R. E., and Bertram, J. E., "General Synthesis Procedure for Computer
Control of Single and Multiloop Linear Systems," I. R. E. WESCON Con-
vention Records, Part 4, 1957.
Kalman, R. E., and Koepcke, R. W., "Optimal Synthesis of Linear Sampling
Control System Using Generalized Performance Indices," A. S. M. E. paper,
58-IRD-6, 1958.
Kondo, B., Iwai, S., and Soga, M., "Finite Settling-time Response in Sampled-
Data Control Systems With Saturation," Proc. of the International Federation
of Automatic Control, Moscow, 1960, pp. 1-6.
Maitra, K. K., and Sarachik, P. E., "Digital Compensation of Continuous-Data
Feedback Control Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 75, Part 2, May 1956, pp.
107-116.
Mori, M., "Discrete Compensation Controls Dead Time Process," Control En-
gineering, January 1962, pp. 57-60.
Nakamura, K., "A Study on Quick Response Sampled-Data Control Systems,"
Proc. of the International Federation on Automatic Control, Moscow, 1960, pp.
1307-1312.
Nishida, F., "Synthesis of Multi-variable Control Systems by Means of Sampled-
Data Compensation," Proc. of the International Federation of Automatic
Control, Moscow, 1960, pp. 515-519.
Ragazzini, J. R., "Digital Computers in Feedback Systems," I. R. E. Convention
Record, 1957, pp. 33-42.
Salzer, J. M., "Signal Flow Techniques for Digital Compensation," Proc.
Computers in Control Systems Conference, October 1957.
Tou, J. T., "Digital Compensation for Control and Simulation," Proc. of the
I. R. E., 45, No. 9, September 1957, pp. 1243-1248.

11
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND
DESIGN OF SAMPLED-DATA
CONTROL SYSTEMS
11.1 INTRODUCTION
In many practical applications of control systems, the actual
signals and disturbances applied to a given control system are random
in nature, unlike the deterministic step, ramp, or sinusoidal functions
considered in the preceding chapters. These signals and disturbances
which are random functions of time can often be described only by
their statistical properties. Therefore, the treatment of control systems
must be considered with continuous as well as sampled-data for
actual random signals and disturbances.
The chief aim of the statistical design of control systems with
random inputs is the creation of an optimum system that will
render a minimum error between the actual output and the desired
output. The design criteria are based mainly on the minimization
of the mean square error, a concept which was first used by
Wiener. The mean-square-error criterion may not be ideal for all
control systems. However, the popularity of the criterion stems from
the fact that if the minimization of the mean square error is used
as the design criterion, the random signals or disturbances are suf-
↑ N. Wiener, The Extrapolation, Interpolation, and Smoothing of Stationary Time
Series, (New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1948).
391

392
Chap. 11
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
n(t)
s(t)
M(s)
c(t)
Actual system
e(t)= c(t)-Ca(t)
r(t)
r(t)
Ca(t)
Mo(s)
Desired system
(a)
M(z)
n(t)
s(t)
C(1)
c(t)
M(s)
Actual system
(11-1)
e(t)= c(t)-ca(t)
r(t)
r(t)
ca(t)
ca(t)
e(nT) = c(nT)-ca(nt)
Mo(s)
Desired system
(b)
Fig. 11-1 (a) Block diagram illustrating the optimum design of
a linear continuous-data system. (b) Block diagram illustrating
the optimum design of a linear sampled-data system.
ficiently described by their correlation functions and power spectral
density functions. Shown in Fig. 11-1a is a block diagram which
illustrates the formulation of a linear optimum system with continu-
ous-data, based on the minimum mean square error criterion. The
design objective is to select a system with the transfer function M(s)
where M(s) may represent an open-loop system or a closed-loop
system with constraints on open-loop elements in a manner that
would minimize the mean square value of the error e(t). The input
signal is assumed to be the sum of a random signal r(t) and a random
noise n(t). The error e(t) is defined as the difference between the
actual system output c(t) and the desired system output ca(t).
The concept of the minimum mean-square-error design of linear
continuous-data systems can be extended to the optimum design of
systems with sampled-data. Fig. 11-1b illustrates the block diagram
of optimum design of a sampled-data system. The design objective is
the determination of the z-transfer function M(z) that will minimize
the mean square sampled error e²(nT). In reality, the block diagram
of Fig. 11-1a may represent a sampled-data system if the actual
system with transfer function M(s) contains samplers or digital
elements.

Sec. 11.2
393
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
11.2 STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF CONTINUOUS
RANDOM SIGNALS
In this section we shall briefly review some of the important prop-
erties of continuous random signals so that the concepts of statistical
description of random processes may be extended to discrete random
signals. Some previous knowledge of basic probability theory and
statistical theory is assumed. Therefore, the material presented here
consists of merely the definitions and descriptions of some important
terms and concepts often used in the analysis of random signals.
Sample Space and Sample Points. The aggregation of all possible
outcomes of a random experiment is called a sample space. With each
basic outcome of the experiment, a sample point may be assigned.
A sample space may consist of a finite number of sample points, and
the sample space is said to be discrete. For instance, as a die is
thrown, the sample space consists of six discrete sample points; as
a coin is thrown, the sample space consists of two discrete points,
namely, heads or tails. On the other hand, a discrete sample space
may consist of an infinite number of points and is called a continu-
ous sample space. A well-known example of a continuous sample
space is a thermal noise voltage caused by thermally excited electrons
in a conductor.
Random Variable. The sample points in a sample space are desig-
nated a variable that takes on the values of the points. A random
variable may be discrete or continuous in correspondence with the
discrete sample space or the continuous sample space. If the random
variable is denoted by X, then in the coin throwing experiment
X is discrete, X = heads or X = tails, whereas in a thermal noise
voltage, X is a continuous random variable and may take on all
possible values of the noise voltage.
Probability Density Functions. The probability density function,
p(x), describes the statistical characteristics of a random process.
The probability that a random variable X will lie in an infinitesimal
range between x and x + dx is
P(x < X < x + dx) = p(x) dx
(11-1)
The probability that the variable X will lie in the range x to x is
P(x₁ <X < x2) = = √ p(x) dx
(11-2)
When the random variable represents points of a random signal
or a random process that is a function of time, probability density

394 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
functions of various orders may conveniently be defined. The first-
order probability density function p(x) can also be written as
p(x, t), denoting the probability that the variable X lies between
and x + dx at the time t. The second-order probability density func-
tion, p(x₁, t₁; x2, t₂), denotes the probability that the X lies between
x₁ and x₁ + dx₁ at t₁ and also lies between x2 and x2 + dx₂ at time
tą. Higher order probability density functions may be defined similarly.
Probability Distribution Function. The probability distribution
function P(x, t) is defined as the probability that the random vari-
able will be less than some value x at the time t. Therefore,
P(x,t) = P[X(t) < x] = ſ_p(x,t) dx
If P(x, t) possesses a first derivative, we have
(11-3)
p(x,t)
=
dP(x, t)
dx
(11-4)
Therefore, Eqs. (11-3) and (11-4) relate the probability density
function and the probability distribution function.
Time Approach and Ensemble Approach. In general, the statistical
properties of a random signal may be measured in two ways: the
time approach and the ensemble approach. In the time approach
measurements of the random signal are made beginning at some
time t₁. An ensemble approach may also be used in making statisti-
cal measurements. Assuming that we can collect a large number of
identical signal generators, the ensemble approach suggests the
measurements of the large number random signals simultaneously at
the time t₁.
Stationary and Ergodic Processes. If in a random process, the
statistical properties are constant and are independent of the time
origin at which they are measured, the process is said to be stationary
with respect to time. In the time approach, if the measurements of
a random signal made beginning at time t₁ produce identical results
to the measurements made beginning at time t₂ or at any other
time, the process is stationary. In the ensemble approach, a random
process is defined as stationary in time if the statistical properties
measured on a large number of random signals from identical sources
are the same, regardless of the time at which the measurements are
made.
A random process is said to be ergodic if its statistical properties
are identical under the time and the ensemble measurements. The
definitions imply that an ergodic process is always stationary, since
the stationary process is a presupposition of ergodicity. However, not

Sec. 11.2
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 395
all stationary processes are ergodic. A random process may be shown
to be stationary under the time ensemble measurements, but the two
results may not be identical.
Moments and Averages. The nth moment of a random variable
x(t) is defined to be the statistical average of the nth power of x(t):
_x"
m₂ = av[x”(t)] = x"(t) = <x"(t)) = [__ x"p(x,t) dx (11-5)
where p(x, t) is the probability density function of x.
The first moment of x(t) is just the average value of x(t);
that is,
av[x(t)] = x(t) = (x(t)) = √__xp(x,t) dx
(11-6)
Equation (11-6) gives the average from the ensemble approach. We
could, however, perform a time averaging process. The time average
of x(t) is simply
x(t) = lim
1
2T -T
x(t) dt
∞0 +1
(11-7)
If x(t) belongs to a random process possessing the ergodic property,
the time average is equal to the ensemble average.
The second moments of x(t) in the time average and the ensemble
average are given by
and
x²(t) = (x²(t)> = lim x²(t) dt
1 T
T→
2T
S™,
T
x²(t) = (x²(t)>
=
x²p(x, t) dx
(11-8)
(11-9)
respectively. From Eq. (11-8) we see that (x²(t)) is simply the
mean square value of x(t). When x(t) represents the error signal
defined in Fig. 11-1a, Eq. (11-8) or Eq. (11–9) gives the mean square
error for optimum system design.
The concept of moments may be extended to two random vari
ables. The (n+m)th order joint moment of the joint probability
density function of two random variables x and y is
<x”(t1)y™(t2)) = [~~ [____x"(t) y™ (t)p(x, t₁ ; y, t₂) dx dy (11-10)
∞
In the equation above p(x, t₁; y, t) is the probability that x has a
value in the range between x and x + dx at time t, and y has a
value in the range between y and y + dy at t₂ and is called the joint
probability density function of x and y.
Correlation Functions. The correlation functions are measurements
of the statistical dependence of one random signal upon another or
upon itself. If x(t) and y(t) are two random processes or signals,

396
Chap. 11
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
the cross-correlation between x and y is represented by the cross-
correlation function
$xv(t1, t2) = ƒ_ƒxyp(x, t₁; y, t₁) dx dy
(11-11)
Equation (11-11) indicates that the cross-correlation function of
and y is equal to the first-order joint moment (or mean) of the joint
probability density of x and y. If x and y are stationary processes,
the probability density function does not depend on the origin of
time. The cross-correlation function given by Eq. (11-11) is inde-
pendent of time t₁ and can be written as
Oxy(T) =
(x(t) y(t + 7)) = f f xyp(x, y, т) dx dy (11-12)
For a stationary process, the cross-correlation function can be deter-
mined from a time average. Thus
Φαν(τ)
=
1
<x(t) y(t + r)) = lim 2+ S x(t) y(t + r) dt (11-13)
T→∞ 2T -T
Furthermore, if the process is ergodic, Eqs. (11-12) and (11-13) are
identical.
When x(t) = y(t) or when only one random signal is involved,
the correlation is given by the autocorrelation function and is defined
to be
or
1 T
S♫♫
2T T
$xx(T) = <x(t)x(t + 7)) = lim ✈ x(t)x(t+r) dt (11-14)
00
$11(T) = √~ x²p(x,7) dx
(11-15)
Some of the important properties of the correlation functions are
given below without proof:
(1) (7) is an even function; i.e., þxx(T) = $11(−T).
(2) |Pxx(T)|≤ $xx(0)
(3) ty(T) = $yz(T)
(4) xx(0) = (x²(t)) (mean square value of x).
Power Spectral Density Function. Essentially, the correlation func-
tions introduced in the last paragraph give descriptions of random
signals in terms of time domain characteristics. This procedure is
often desirable. On the other hand, random signals can and often
should be described in terms of frequency-domain characteristics. If
the correlation functions are looked upon as time functions (of 7),
it is natural to take the Laplace transform of p(T) or (7) in
order to obtain frequency-domain characteristics. Since the correlation
functions theoretically extend from ∞ to +∞ in T, a two-sided

Sec. 11.3
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 397
Laplace transformt has to be carried out. Therefore, the autospectral
density function is defined to be
-ST
Pız(S) = √ Þzz(7) e¯” dT
and the cross-power spectral density function is
-ST
Þzy(S) = √~ $zy(7) e¯” dr
(11-16)
(11-17)
The correlation functions can be obtained by taking the inverse
Laplace transform of the power density functions in the usual
manner. Thus
$zz(T) =
1 •joo
2nj -joo
SPxx(s) e* ds
(11-18)
Some important properties of the power spectral density functions
are given below:
xx
(1) Pxx(jw) is an even function of frequency. Thus Paz (jw)
Þxx(−jw)
(2) Pzy(jw) = Þyr(−jw)
=
(3) If x(t) and y(t) are the input and output signals, respectively,
of a linear system with transfer function G(s), the power spectral
densities of x(t) and y(t) are related by
-
Þyy(s) = G(s)G( − s) Þzz(S)
11.3 STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SAMPLED
RANDOM SIGNALS
(11-19)
In the preceding sections we have defined correlation functions
and power spectral density functions which are used for the charac-
terization of continuous random signals. These concepts can also be
extended to the statistical descriptions of sampled or discrete random
signals. As has been pointed out, there are two ways of determining
the correlation functions of random processes: the time average and
the ensemble average. However, in sampled-data systems, in addition
to the two ways of averaging, there are at least two possible ways
of considering a sampled signal. First of all, we can consider the
values of a signal at the sampling instants only. In this case, the
signal is treated as a sampled sequence or a sequence of numbers.
Another way of considering a signal is to treat it as a sampled signal
consisting of a train of amplitude modulated pulses. Referring to
Fig. 11-2a, r(t) is a member of a stationary random process which
† Van der Pol, Balth, and H. Bremmer, Operational Calculus Based on the Two-
sided Laplace Integral, (London: Cambridge University Press, 1950).

398
Chap. 11
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
r(t)
(a)
塔​(1)
r(t)
分​(1)
-37
-27
-T
Op
T
27
37
(b)
r(nT) r(1)
*(1)
-37 -27
-T
O
T
27
37
(c)
Fig. 11-2 (a) Sampler. (b) Continuous and sampled random
signals. (c) Sampled random sequence and impulse train.
is being sampled periodically every T second. The time during which
the sampling switch is closed is p and is assumed to be very short
compared with the sampling period T. The waveforms of the con-
tinuous and the sampled signals are depicted in Fig. 11-2b. If r(t)
is a stationary ergodic process, the autocorrelation function of r(t)
may be obtained as either a time average or an ensemble average.
Time average: rr(T)
Ensemble average:
=
1
lim ₂+ Sr(t)r(t + 7) dt
To→ ∞
2T.
00
(11-20)
$rr(T) = √ √ X₁X?pr(X₁, x₂; т) dx, dx₂ (11-21)
where pr(x1, x2; 7) is the probability that r(t) has a value x, at any
time and a value 2 at 7 seconds later.
First, let us consider that the signal r(t) is characterized by the
values at the sampling instants only. The sampled sequence is denoted
by r(nT), where n = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3,..., ±∞. We shall now show
that if r(t) is assumed to be a member of a stationary ergodic process,
r(nT) is also a stationary ergodic random sequence, and the time
averaging and ensemble averaging are equivalent for this discrete
case. Furthermore, the sampled sequence averages are equal to the
time average of the continuous time function r(t).
Since r(t) and r(nT) are all ergodic, the second probability density

Sec. 11.3
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 399
function of r(t) is equal to the second probability density of the
sampled random sequence r(nT).
Pr(X1, X2;T) = pr„[X1, X2 ; kT]
(11-22)
where kT = T, and k is an integer.
The autocorrelation function of r(nT) may be expressed as an
ensemble average.
$1.7.(kT) = √ √ x1x2þг(x1, x2 ; kT) dxɩ dx2
-∞
However, referring to Eq. (11-22), we have
Pr₁₂(kT) = √ √ x₁x₂pr(x1, x2, kT) dx, dx₂
(11-23)
(11-24)
Comparing Eqs. (11-24) and (11-21), we have
Þr„„(kT) = $rr(T)|T=KT = $rr(kT)
(11-25)
proving that when r(t) is an ergodic process, the sampled sequence
average and the continuous time average are equivalent. Equation
(11-25) also provides an interesting result in that the autocorrelation
function of a stationary random sequence r(nT) may be obtained by
sampling the autocorrelation function (T) of the continuous ergodic
process r(t). For instance, assuming that the autocorrelation function
,,(T)
-T
(0)
r(1)
(T)
*(t), r(nT)
(KT)
(b)
P(7)
Proro(T)
Pro(37)
-4T -3T -2T -T
O
T 27 37 4T
(c)
T
Fig. 11-3 (a) Autocorrelation function of r(t). (b) Sampling of
autocorrelation function (7). (c) Autocorrelation function of
r(nT), pr(kT).

400 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
of a given ergodic process r(t) is as shown in Fig. 11-3a, the auto-
correlation function of r(nT), pr.r.(kT) can be thought of as the
output of an ideal sampler at T = kT when (T) is the input to
the sampler.
The autocorrelation function of r(nT) can also be written in
terms of the time average.
1
Pr..(kT) = lim
lim 2N+1 Ž¸r(nT)r(nT + kT) (11-26)
N-∞
Since r(nT) is ergodic, Eqs. (11-24), (11-25), and (11-26) are all
equivalent.
When the pulse train of Fig. 11-2b is replaced by an impulse train,
00
r* (t) = Σ_r(mT)8(t − mT)
M=-∞
The shifted impulse train is
r* (t + T)
(t++) =
-
(11-27)
00
Σr(mT)(t − mT +7)
-
(11-28)
The autocorrelation function of r*(t) is given by
Þrr(7) = lim 21
Substitution of Eqs. (11-27) and (11-28) into Eq. (11-29) yields
•To
Фтото (т)
=
lim 21
2T
27.
- To
", r* (t) r* (t + 7) dt
(11-29)
00
To
2T.
To
Σ Σ r(mT)r(nT)
To→∞
M=00 N = -∞0
× 8(t mT)S(t − nT + T) dt
-
-
(11-30)
The integral of Eq. (11-30) may be broken up into a sum of inte-
grals with each integral performed over one sampling interval.
N→∞
1
Σ.Σ
Z√(m-1) r
(2N + 1) m=-N
Σ Σ r(mT)r(nT)
(11-31)
m = ∞ N=-∞
× S(t - mT)(t − nT + 7) dt
Letting at mT, Eq. (11-31) becomes
-
N→ ∞
1
(2N + 1)
N
∞
00
Σ Σ Σ r(mT)r(nT)
m=-N m∞ N=∞o
Фтото (т)
=
lim
=
PTT. (T)
=
lim
(2N¹
1 T/2
X
T -T/2
N
1
Since
Pr₁₂[(n − m)T] = lim
T/2
-
-T/2
m=-N
and 8(0)8(o+mT − nT + 7) dt = d[7 − (n − m)T) (11-34)
Eq. (11-32) is written as
-
2N + 1
N-00
Σ_r(mT)r(nT)
-
-
+ 7, 8(0)8(o + mT − nT + 7) dt
(11-32)
(11-33)

Sec. 11.3
401
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
00
Proro(7) = ± Σ Σ Prasa[(n − m)T]8[r − (n − m)T] (11-35)
T
Letting k = n - m, Eq. (11-35) is finally written as
Pr+ro(T) = 1 Σ Pr..(kT)8(7 – kT)
k=1∞
-
(11-36)
The last equation shows that the autocorrelation function of a
stationary sampled impulse train r*(t) is an impulse train in τ modu-
lated by 1/T times the autocorrelation function of the stationary
continuous signal r(t).
However, the sampled random process r(t) and the impulse
modulated signal r*(t) are not stationary processes (although r(t)
is stationary). The correlation functions derived from the ensemble
approach are not equal to those of the time averages. For instance,
the autocorrelation function of r*(t) based on the ensemble average is
PTT (T, t)
=
1
N
00
lim 2N+1 Ž Σ Σ r(mT)r(nT)
N→ ∞
m=-Nm = ∞ N=-∞0
× 8(t mT)8(t − nT + r)
-
Simplifying, Eq. (11-37) becomes
Фтото (т, t) =
=
-
(11-37)
Ž Ž þr♫.[(n − m)T]8(t − mT)8(t − nT + 7) (11–38)
M=∞ N=1∞
-
In addition to being a function of the shift variable 7, the auto-
correlation function determined from the ensemble approach is also
a periodic function of time. This fact checks with the physical
interpretation of ensemble averaging. Since any number of the en-
semble of r*(t) has values only at the sampling instants t = kT, the
average of the ensemble has to be evaluated at the sampling instants.
and has zero values at all other times. The difference between Eqs.
(11-36) and (11-38) is illustrated by the typical correlation function
of *(t) shown in Fig. 11-4. The time-averaged autocorrelation
function of r*(t) is time-invariant and is shown to be a sequence of
impulse sheets. The ensemble-averaged autocorrelation functions of
r*(t) appear as impulse trains in a two-dimensional t versus 7 plane.
In the following sections only the time-invariant correlation functions
will be considered. Design of optimum sampled-data systems using
the time-invariant correlation functions has been investigated by
DeRusso.t
In the same manner, we can show that the cross-correlation
+ P. M. DeRusso, "Ultimate Performance Limitations of Linear Sampled-Data Systems,"
M. I. T. Electronic System Laboratory Report 7843-R-3, June 1959.

402
Chap. 11
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN

Pr(T)
$,*(7)
-3T
-27
-T
2T
37
(a)
-37
-27
,,(T, 1)
(b)
$(7)
2T
37
Fig. 11-4 Typical correlation functions showing the difference
between the ensemble average and the time average of the non-
stationary time series r*(t). (a) Autocorrelation function of r*(t)
from the time approach (time-invariant). (b) Autocorrelation
function of r* (t) from the ensemble approach (time-variant).
function of two stationary sampled random sequences r(nT) and
c(nT) is given by
Pr.cn (kT) = prc(kT)
=
1
lim Σ_r(nT) c(nT + kT) (11-39)
2N + 1
N→∞
n=-N
and the cross-correlation function of two sampled impulse trains r*(t)
and c*(t) is
1 To
Pr•c (7) = lim ₂+ S7, r*(t) c* (t + 7) dt
=
To∞ 2To To
00
Σ þrce(kT)8(7 – kT) (time av.) (11-40)
T k=1∞
where prc (kT) is given by Eq. (11-39).
As in the continuous case, we can define the sampled power

Sec. 11.3
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 403
spectral density function of a sampled signal r*(t) as the Laplace
transform or the z-transform of the correlation function of r*(t).
Therefore,
-
Þrr (S) = £[pr·r(7)] = + S Σ Þrs.(kT)8(7 – kT)e¯* dr (11-41)
or
∞ k=-∞
00
Proro (5) = = Σ Prs.(kT) e¯k™
T
Taking the z-transform on both sides of Eq. (11-42) yields
(11-42)
00
Φτερο (2)
=
·Z[Pr·r• (5)] = T ==∞ Prat (kT) 2¯*
Σ
(11-43)
Since rr(kT) = pr„„(kT), Eq. (11-43) becomes
1
Þ‚·‚· (2) = — Σ þrr(kT) ≈-*
T k=-∞
(11-44)
Note that except for the multiplying factor 1/T and the limits of
summation, Eq. (11-44) is exactly analogous to the relation of the
z-transform of the time series r*(t): that is
00
R(z) = Σ r(kT) z¯*
k=0
(11-45)
where it is assumed that r(t) exists only for t greater than zero.
Equation (11-44) also implies that whenever the correlation function
of a stationary random process r(t) is given, the sampled power
spectral density function of r(t) or of r*(t) can be obtained with
the aid of the z-transform table. Equation (11-44) can be written as
or
00
-k
Þ‚„r(2) = +[ ≥ þrr(kT)≈¯* + Σ þrr(kT) ≈¯* — prr(0)] (11-46)
T k=-∞
k=0
-
P‚r(2) = +[ Σ prr (− kT)2* + Σ þrr(kT)z¯* − pr(0)] (11-47)
TT
k=0
Since (T) is an even function, rr(-kT) = prr(kT), Eq. (11-47)
is finally written as
Þ‚r(2) = +[A(2´¹)
+ A(x) − $rr(0)]
(11-48)
In Eq. (11-48)
00
A(z) =
- k
Σ þrr(kT) z¯* = Z[Þrr(s)]*
(11-49)
k=0
A(z¯¹) = Σ þrr(kT) 2* = Z[Þ‚(s)]¯ = Z[Þr(s)]:=zı (11–50)
TT
where [P,,(s)]* has all the poles of Pr(s) that lie in the left-half
s-plane and [P,,(s)]¯ has all the poles of Pr(s) that lie in the right-
half s-plane and

404 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
Þ₁r(s) = [Þ,,(S)]* + [Þrr(s)]¯
(11-51)
pr(0) is given by
PTT (0)
-
L'[P,,(S)]+0 = L-¹[P,,(S)]F=0
(11-52)
TT
The following example illustrates how the sampled spectral density
of a stationary random process may be obtained by use of Eq. (11-
48) and the z-transform table.
Example 11-1
Assuming that the auto-power spectral density of a stationary random
process r(t) is given by
PTT(S)
=
36
-s²+36
(11-53).
we wish to find the sampled power spectral density function Pr(z). Using
Eq. (11-51), we see that
3
3
Ptr(s) = [P,,(S)]* + [Prr(s)]-
=
+
6+s 6
(11-54)
-
S
From the z-transform table
A(z) = Z[Þ,,(s)]*
Also
1
Prr(0) = L-¹[Þ‚r(S)]+7=0
=
A(≈¹) = [Þ,,(s)]¯ =
•C+joo
32
2- e-67
32-1
2-1 -e
=-
2πj Sex [P,, (5)]* ds =
c-joo
c-joo
6+s
(11-57)
Substitution of Eqs. (11-55), (11-56), and (11-57) into Eq. (11-48) yields
=
(11-55)
(11-56)
1
Pc+ joo
Sex 6 3 3 ds = 3
Þr·r•(2)
3
=
T
z
-
Z
+
2-1
2-1. -6T
1
3
1-e-12T
=
T
— e¯6Tz¯¹)(1 − e−©™z)
(11-58)
(11-59)
11.4 SAMPLED RANDOM SIGNALS IN SAMPLED-DATA
SYSTEMS
In this section we shall conduct the analysis of sampled-data
systems with random signals. Let us consider the open-loop sampled-
data system of Fig. 11-5a. The input r(t) is assumed to be a member
of a stationary random process. We shall see that the power spectral
function and the sampled power spectral function of the system out-
put are given by
and
Pec($) = G(s)G(-s) Pr(s)
сс
Pec(z) = G(z) G(z¯¹) Þr••(2)
(11-60)
(11-61)

Sec. 11.4
405
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
r(t)
*(t)
G(s)
(a)
*---►c*(1)
-c(1)
4,0,*(7)
0,*(7)
$cc(7)
G(s)
G(-s)
$,*,*(s)
$,*c ( s)
Dcc(s)
(b)
0,*,*(z)
$(KT)
B,*c*(z)
Pc*c*(z)
G(z)
G(z)
(KT)
Госп
Фспор
(KT)
(c)
Fig. 11-5 (a) Open-loop sampled-data system with random input.
(b) Block diagram showing the relationship between power
spectral functions in a sampled-data system. (c) Block diagram
showing the z-transform relationship between sampled power
spectral functions of a sampled-data system.
respectively. With reference to Fig. 11-5b, Eq. (11-60) implies that
if (7) is the input of the system with G(s)G(−s) as the transfer
function, the output of the system is pcc(7). Furthermore, when
(T) is the input signal, the output of G(s) is prc(T), the cross-
correlation function of the sampled signal r*(t) and continuous
output c(t).
By use of the convolutional integral, the output of G(s) is written
Sg(o) do lim
ƒ___ 8(0) Pr·‚· (1 − 0 ) do = [__ g(o) do lim
1
To
r* (t)r*[t+(7−o)]dt
- To
(11-62)
To→ 2To
Interchanging the order of integration, Eq. (11-62) becomes
To∞0
1
To
2T。 S", r*(t)dt [___8(0)r*[t + (1 − o)] do
0 To
lim 2 S
2T₂ S",
1
To
= lim 2+ ", r* (t) c(t + 7) dt
To→∞
- To
which is the definition of prc(T). Thus
In order to prove that
=
Pre(s) G(s) Pr($)
Pee(s) = G(-s) Pr·c($)
Фсс(ѕ) ·
(11-63)
(11-64)
(11-65)
we use the properties of Pee(s) and Pre(s) as a basis and write
-
Þec($) = Þec( − s) = G(s) Þr•c( − s) = G(s) Per•($)
-
(11-66)

406 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
Thus when per(7) is the input signal, the output of G(s) is
1
___ 8(0)$c•(1 − 0) do = [___8(o) do lim 27 S", c(t)r*[t + (7−0)] dt
To→∞ 2To To
(11-67)
Interchanging the order of integration in the last equation, we have
1 To
lim 27. S", c(t)dt [__ 8(0)r*[t + (7 − 0)]do
To→ ∞
= lim
To
1 To
27. Sr, c(t) c(t + r) dt
- To
(11-68)
which is pec(T). Combining Eqs. (11-64) and (11-65), we have Eq.
(11-60).
Equation (11-61) is the counterpart of Eq. (11-60) in the z-
domain. The proof of Eq. (11-61) can also be divided into two steps.
First, we shall prove that
Pre(2) = G(2)Þr·r•(2)
(11-69)
When the input to G(s) is (kT), the output is written from the
superposition principle.
Σ pr..(kT)g(mT – kT)
∞
=
Σ lim
k= ∞ N∞∞
1
2N + 1
N
Ž_r(qT)r(qT + kT)g(mT – kT) (11-70)
Q=-N
Interchanging the order of summation in the last equation, we have
=
00
Σ þrata(kT)g(mT – kT)
k=-∞
1
00
lim 2N+ 1 Ž_r(qT) Σ r(qT + kT)g(mT − kT)
N→∞
Q=-N
k=-∞
Letting qk = n, Eq. (11-71) reads
∞ - N
N
00
– (11–71)
-
++1 Σ r(qT) Σ r(nT)g(mT + qT − nT)
1
lim
2N + 1
=
lim
Q=-N
1
2N + 1
N→∞
N
Σ_r(qT)c(mT + qT)
9=-N
which is prc.(mT). Therefore,
00
$r«c«(mT) = Σ þr«r«(kT)g(mT — kT)
k=-∞
(11-72)
(11-73)
Multiplying both sides of Eq. (11-73) by z-"/T and taking the sum-
mation from m =
--
∞ to +∞, we have

Sec. 11.4
407
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
— Σ_ pr.c.(mT) 2¯™ =
T
M=1∞
1 Σ Σ prs.(kT)g(mT — kT)x¯"
M=-∞ k=-∞
00
-
= = Σ Þrs.(kT) x¯* Σ_g(mT – kT)2−(m−k)
T k=-∞
Therefore, it is proved that
-k
M=1∞
-
(11-74)
Pr.c. (2) = G(2) Pr.(z)
(11-75)
In a similar manner, we can show that
Pec(z) = G(z¯¹) Pr•c(z)
(11-76)
Combining Eqs. (11-75) and (11-76) yields
Þec(z) = G(2)G(2) Pr•(2)
(11-77)
which is the desired result.
The relationship given by Eq. (11-77) is derived with the con-
sideration that only the values of c(t) at the sampling instants are
used. The modified z-transform concept can be used in the present
studies so that each point of c(t) may be considered. With refer-
ence to Fig. 11-6, a fictitious time delay of AT seconds is inserted
in the system. By defining m = 1 − ▲, 0 <m<1, the modified z-
transform of the system output is
where
-
C(z, m) = G(z, m) R(z)
G(z, m)
=%
00
Σ g[(k + m)T]z¯*
k=0
(11-78)
(11-79)
c(nT, m)
r(t)
*(1)
G(s)
e-47
(a)
Orr (KT)
$,*,*(s)
Prc (KT, m)
G*(s, m)
G*(-s, m)
§,*c*(s, m)
Occ(KT, m)
Pcc (s, m)
(b)
c(t-AT)
Fig. 11-6 (a) Open-loop sampled-data system with fictitious delay.
(b) Block diagram showing the 2-transform relationship between
the modified sampled power spectral functions of a sampled-data
system.
† G. W. Johnson, "Statistical Analysis of Sampled-Data Systems," I. R. E. WESCON
Convention Records, 1957, pp 187-195; J. T. Tou, "Statistical Design of Digital Control
Systems," I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, Sept. 1960, pp. 290–297.

408 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
If pec(kT, m) is defined as the modified autocorrelation function of
the random sampled sequence c(kT + mT − T), where 0 < m ≤ 1,
pec(kT, m) lim
=
N→∞
1
2N + 1
N
-
Ž_c(nT+mT− T)c(nT+mT − T + kT)
n=-N
(11-80)
it can be shown that the modified sampled-spectral density of c(t) is
Фес(z,т)
=
Pec(z, m)
сс
***
-k
00
1
Σ þcc(kT, m) z¯*
1
— 2¯¹
T k=-∞
(11-81)
Then, Pee(2, m) is related to the sampled spectral density of r(t) by
G(z, m)G(z¯¹‚ m)Þr·r•(z)
(11-82)
The proofs of Eqs. (11-81) and (11-82) are straightforward; there-
fore, they will not be elaborated here. The reader may derive these
two equations as an exercise.
Equation (11-82) can be expressed in terms of real frequency o
by letting sjw and z = es":
=
Þcc(jw, m) = |G* ( jw, m) |² Þµ•ï(jw)
(11-83)
Similarly, Eq. (11-77) is written as a function of real frequency w.
Þc•c•(jw) = |G*(jw) |²Þr•r•(jw)
(11-84)
Before entering the discussion of mean square error and the
optimum design of sampled-data systems with random signals, a com-
parison of the statistical descriptions of continuous-data and sampled-
data many prove helpful. Corresponding functions and relationships
between continuous-data systems are tabulated in Table 11-1.
Thus far, we have limited our illustrations to the derivation of
the correlation relations between signals of a single path system. In
the design of optimum systems using the mean-square-error criterion,
the cross-correlation between signals in two independent systems must
be evaluated often. Shown in Fig. 11-7 are two independent open-
loop sampled-data systems (in a design problem one may denote the
actual system, whereas the other may be the ideal or desired system).
The cross-spectral densities Pc,c,(z) and Pc,c,(s) are to be expressed
as functions of the system transfer functions and the power spectral
densities of the other signals. In a manner similar to the method
used in proving Eqs. (11-60) and (11-61), we can show that
and
Þ₁₁c₂(z) = G₁(z¯¹) Pr₁c,(z) = G₁(2¯¹) G₂(z)Þ,,,(z) (11-85)
Pc,c,(z) = Þc,c,(≈¯¹) = G₂(≈¯¹) Pr₂r.(2)
C2C1
-1
= G₁(2)G₂(≈¯¹) Þr,r,(2)
(11-86)
Similarly, the cross-spectral density between the two continuous
outputs ci(t) and c2(t) may be written as

Sec. 11.4
409
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
TABLE 11-1
CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF SAMPLED-DATA
SYSTEMS AND CONTINUOUS-DATA SYSTEMS
Stationary
random process
Continuous-data systems
r(1) or R(s)
Sampled-data systems
r(nT), r*(1), R*(s), or R(z)
To
1
Correlation
functions
,,(T) = lim
°r (1) r(1+7) dt
,,(KT) = lim
2N+1
∞48
To 400
1
$,*,*(7) =
= lim
Spectral
density
Input-output
relations
40,0(7)==
k=-∞
N
Σr\nT)r\nT+kT)
n = -N
r* ( 1 ) r*(1+7) dt
,,(KT)8 (7-KT)
$, (5) = /00 $4,,(7) `ST OT
$,*,*(5) = =
(KT)ek
-kTs
k=-∞
$,0,0(2) =
∞
Σ
k=-∞
$,, (2, m) ===
P₁(KT) Z˜k
k = -∞
,,(KT, m)zk
C(s) = G(s)R(s)
C(z) = G(z)R(z)
C(jw) = G(jw)R(jw)
C(s) = G*(s)R*(s)
r(1)
c(1)
r(1)
*(1)
G(s)
G(s)
c*(1)
C(1)
$(7)
$10(5)
C(7)
$,*,*(T)
G(s)
G(-s)
0°C(T)
G(s)
$cc(T)
,,(s)
Pre(s)
G(-s)
Pcc(s)
4,*,*(s)
$,*c(s)
cc(s)
cc(s) = G(s)G(-s),,(s)
$,,(KT)
Prc(KT)
G(z)
cc(AT)
G(2 ¹)
$(2)
Prc(z)
Pcc (z)
(jw) = |G(jw) | 20 (jw)
Pcc (5) G (s)G*(-s),,(s)
(z) = G(z)G(z),(z)
$c•c•(jw) = |G(jw)|² $,•,*(jw)
Pcc (2, m) = G(z, m)G(z˜', m)$,(z)

410 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
₁(1)
*(1)
G₁(s)
-c₁(1)
·C₁(t)
----
►cz(t)
52(1)
52 (1)
G₂(s)
c2(t)
Fig. 11-7 Block diagrams illustrating statistical relationships be-
tween input and output of sampled-data systems.
Фаса (s)
=
G₁(-s) G₂(s) Prir;(S)
(11-87)
Similar relations can also be derived in terms of the modified z-
transforms. For instance
Pc,c,(z, m) = G₁(z¯¹, m) G₂(z, m)Þ,,r:(2)
(11-88)
where G₁(z¹, m) and G.(z, m) are the modified z-transforms associated
with G₁(-s) and G₂(s), respectively. In fact, these above relation-
ships for sampled-data systems are analogous to those for strictly
continuous systems. If one is familiar with the relations between
signals for continuous-data systems, Eqs. (11-85) through (11-88)
may be written out directly. A comparison of the spectral density
relationships for continuous-data and sampled-data systems is made
in Fig. 11-8.
11.5 MEAN-SQUARE ERROR
As is well known, when the minimization of the mean-square
error is chosen as the performance criterion, the design of optimum
linear continuous-data control systems may be carried out using the
descriptions of the stationary signals in the system by correlation.
functions and spectral densities. Evidently, the mean-square error
criterion can also be extended to the design of optimum linear
sampled-data control systems. In this section, we shall relate the
mean-square errors of some typical sampled-data systems to the
correlation functions and the spectral densities of the input and the
output signals. The systems are assumed to be free from noise and
disturbances. Although open-loop configurations are illustrated, the
derivations can be extended easily to closed-loop systems.
Let us consider the sampled-data system shown in Fig. 11-9. The
system is characterized by having sampled inputs and outputs. The

Sec. 11.5
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 411
Continuous-data systems
Sampled-data systems
(1)
G₁(s)
C₁(1)
(1)
G₁(s)
(1)
12(1)
G₂(s)
C₂(1)
72(1)
G₂(s)
62(1)
(7)
G₁(s)
P12c (7)
(s)
(s)
G₂(-s)
06269(71
(7)
Proc(T)
$229,(5)
Br2r,(2)
G₁(z)
PC2C (7)
$129,(2)
G₂(2-1)
(7)
$(7)
Bar2(5)
G₂(s)
PC,C2(7)
(7)
G₂(-s)
P(7)
$2,92(5)
G₁(-s)
PCC2(7)
Br₁12(2)
G₂(s)
$c₁52(2)
$121(7)
$6,02(2)
Pc2(7)
G₂(-s)
$121(5)
G(s)
$26,(7)
721
(7)
*(T)
$6254155
$299 (5)
G₂(21)
$120 (7)
Brary (2)
$6259(2)
G₁(z)
$112(7)
$6209 (2)
PC (7)
G₂(s)
Pc,cz
(+)
$(7)
(s)
G₁(-s)
Price(T)
Brac₂(5)
G₂(z)
Pcc (7)
$1₁r2(2)
G₁(2)
(z)
Discrete output signals
**(7)
$(s)
G₂(s)
Pric₂
(T)
(7)
G₁(-s)
Bric₂(s)
Continuous output signals
G₂(z, m)
Pr.co(z, m) G₁(z, m) $c,c, (2, m)
Modified z-transform of output
Fig. 11-8 Block diagrams illustrating the relations between input
and output signals of two systems.

412 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
r(t)
*(t)
c(1)
c*(t)
M(z)
r(nT)
T
c(nT)
e(nT)
e (t)
(1)
Ca(t)
ca(t)
Ma(z)
r(NT)
Ca(nt)
Fig. 11-9 Sampled-data system to be designed in the sense of
minimum mean-square error.
error sequence is defined as the difference between the desired output
sequence ca(nT) and the actual output sequence c(nT); that is,
-
e(nT) = ca(nT) – c(nT)
The mean-square sampled error is given by
-
e(nT) = c«(nT) — c(nT)
=
·
(11-89)
cå(nT) – ca(nT)c(nT) — c(nT)ca(nT) + c²(nT) (11-90)
In view of the relationships
e²(nT) = pee(0) lim
=
-
1
2nj
1
2N + 1
N→∞
f. Þee (2) z¯¹ dz
N
Σ Že²(nT)
n=-N
(11-91)
Ž_ca(nT)c(nT)
1
and
Ca(NT) c(NT)
=
Фсас (0)
= lim
2N + 1
N→∞
n=-N
1
=
2πj
f. Þco (2) z ¯ ¹ dz
(11-92)
the sampled spectral density of e(nT) may be written as
Pee (z) = Þcaca(z) — Þçc(2) – Þœca(2) + Þcc(2)
-
CCd
(11-93)
From Fig. 11-8 and Table 11-1, the following relationships may be
written:
Фсаса (z)
=
TT
Ma(z) Ma(z¯¹)Þ,,(2)
Pec(2) = M(z) M(z¯¹)Þ,,(z)
=
Pec(2) M(2) Ma(z¯¹) Prr (2)
M(z)Mɑ(≈¯¹)Þ,,(z)
-
Pcc (z) = M(2¯¹) Ma(z) Prr(2)
(11-94)
(11-95)
(11-96)
(11-97)
Substitution of Eqs. (11-94) through (11-97) into Eq. (11-93) yields
Þee(z) = [Ma(z) Ma(z¯¹) — M(z) Ma(z¯¹)
-
- M(2) Ma(z) + M(z) M(2¯¹)] Pr(2) (11-98)
Therefore, Eq. (11-98) shows that the sampled spectral density Pee(2)
is represented by the system transfer functions M(z), Ma(z), and
the input sampled spectral density (2). The mean-square sampled

Sec. 11.5
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 413
error is obtained by substituting Pee(z) into Eq. (11-91). The design
objective is the determination of the transfer function M(z) in such
a way that the mean-square sampled error e²(nT) is a minimum.
In general, most sampled-data systems have sampled as well as
continuous signals. Shown in Fig. 11-10 is a sampled-data system
r(t)
*(+)
c(1)
M(s)
r(t)
Ca(t)
Mo(s)
e (1)
T
e(t)
Fig. 11-10 Sampled-data system with continuous output.
with continuous output signal. The system is compared with a con-
tinuous model Ma. The mean-square error of the system is defined as
e²(t) = [ca(t) = c(t)]²
=
ca(t)
Also
e² (t)
=
=
-
—
-
ca(t)c(t) − c(t)ca(t) + c²(t)
To
lim 27 √, e²(t) dt = pee(0)
To→∞0 2To -To
1
+joo
foto Pee(s) ds
2nj Jс-joo
Фес
(11-99)
(11-100)
Similar expressions can also be written for ca(t), ca(t)c(t), and the
other terms in Eq. (11-99). Therefore, the spectral density of e(t)
is written as
-
CC
Pee(s) = Pata($) — Pec($) - Poc($) + Pec($) (11-101)
From Fig. 11-10 the following relationships between the spectral
density functions may be written:
Pesca ($) = Ma(s) Ma(-s) Prr(s)
(11-102)
=
Poc($) M(s) M( − s) Pr., (S)
M(-s) Þr••(5)
TT
(11-103)
=
Pec(s) M(s) Ma(-s) Prr(s)
(11-104)
Φα(s)
=
(11-105)
Poc($) M(-s) Ma(s) Prr(s)
where Pr(s) and P(s) involve the cross-correlation between a
continuous signal and a sampled signal. We can show that
Þr·r(T) = $pr·(7) = = $rr(7)
(11-106)
Substitution of Eqs. (11-101) through (11-106) into Eq. (11-100)
yields
† J. R. Ragazzini and G. F. Franklin, page 265. op. cit.

414 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
1 •C+joo
-
c¹(t) = 24j Sex {[Mo(8) Ma( − 3) — — M(s) Ma( − s)
/c-joo
− —M( − s) Me(s)]Þ,,(s) + M(s) M( − s) Þ,…,(s) } ds
-
-
(11-107)
As is evident now, the mean-square error may be expressed as a
function of the power spectral densities of r(t) and r*(t) and the
transfer functions M(s) and Ma(s). In an analysis problem, e²(t)
may be obtained from Eq. (11-107) if Mɑ(s), M(s) and r(t) are
specified. In the design problem, r(t) and Ma(t) are specified, and
the design objective is to determine M(s) so that e²(t) is a minimum.
The transfer function M(s) used here is entirely general and could
represent a feedback system with or without sampling.
However, the evaluation of the integral of Eq. (11-107) usually
may present some difficulties, since M(s) in sampled-data systems
usually contains the term e-T as well as s. If e(t) can be accurately
described by the error sequence e(nT), the mean-square sampled
error can be used as a close approximate of the true error. In this
case, the z-transform method may be applied. The sampled error is
not a good measure of e(t) if the system has inter-sampling ripples
or hidden oscillations. A compromise may be made by using the
modified z-transform technique. The "modified" error sequence may
be written as
e(nT, m) = ca(nT, m)
Ca(nT, m) - c(nT,m)
(11-108)
where 0m 1. Taking the mean-square values on both sides of
Eq. (11-108), we have
e²(nT,m) = cå(nT,m)
-
Ca(nT, m)c(nT,m)
--
- c(nT, m)cɑ(nT,m) + c²(nT, m) (11-109)
In view of the following relationships,
1
e² (nT, m) =
2пј
f. Þee (z, m) z¯¹ dz
(11-110)
1
=
2πj
f. Þc« (z, m) z¯¹ dz
(11-111)
Ca(nT, m)c(nT,m)
the modified mean-square error is written as
e² (nT, m)
=
1
27j §. [Þce.(z, m) – Þœ(z, m)
-
- Pœca(z, m) + Þcc(z, m)] z¯¹ dz
(11-112)
From Figs. 11-8 and 11-10, the following relationships may be written:
Þca(z, m) = Zm[Ma(s) Ma( − s) Þrr(s)]
Фес(z,т)
=
M(z, m) M(z¯¹, m)Þ,,(z)
(11-113)
(11-114)

Sec. 11.5
415
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Þcc(z, m) = Zm[M(s) Ma(−s)Þrr(s)]
(11-115)
Þœ.(z, m) = Zm[M( − s) Ma(s)Þrr(S)]
(11-116)
CCd
TT
Substitution of Eqs. (11-113) through (11-116) into Eq. (11-112)
yields
e²(nT,m)
=
-
1
2nj
§. {Zm[Ma(5) Ma(−5)Þ,,(s) – M(s) Ma(−5) Þrr(S)
1
Ma(s) M(-s) Þrr(s)] + M(z, m) M(z¯¹, m)Þ,,(z)} z¯¹ dz
(11-117)
In this last equation for each value of m between zero and unity,
we get a mean-square value of the error samples for that particular
m. A typical e²(nT, m) versus m curve may be of the form shown
in Fig. 11-11. To obtain the mean-square error e²(t) that is a
constant, Eq. (11-117) must be averaged from m = 0 to m = 1.
Therefore, e²(t) is given by
Mean-square
error
e²(nT, m)
e2(t)
m
1.0
Fig. 11-11 Mean-square error e²(t) and modified mean-square
error e²(nT, m).
1
e²(t)
=
-
1 ≤ 0 S'e²(nT, m) dm
(11-118)
Substituting Eq. (11-110) into Eq. (11-118) yields
1
e'(t) = S'' [ 27; §, Þee(x, m) x¯¹dz]dm
(11-119)
Inversion of the order of integration, which is allowable in this case,
z
e²(t)
=
1
2πj
§. [S' Þec(z, m) dm] x´¹ dz
(11-120)
The following example illustrates the mean-square-error method.
Example 11-2
Figure 11-12 shows a sampled-data system whose mean-square error is to
be evaluated. The system M is assumed to be a zero-order hold and M₁(s) = 1.
The power spectral density of the input signal is
† M. Mori, "Statistical Treatment of Sampled-Data Control Systems for Actual
Random Inputs," Trans. A. S. M. E., Basic Engineering, Feb. 1958, pp. 444-456.

416 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
r(t)
M(s)
*(1)
1-e¯ST
c(t)
S
e(t)
ca(t) = r(t)
Fig. 11-12 Zero-order hold system for Example 11-2.
TT
Φτ+(s)
200
-
ω
(11-121)
The mean square error of this system will give a measure of the ability of
data-reconstruction of the zero-order hold. From Eqs. (11-100) and (11–101),
the mean square error is written as
e² (t)
=
1 rc+joo
2πj f*** [Peace($) – Þec($) − Þœ(5) + Þæœ(5)]ds
c-joo
-
Фсаса (0) - Фсос (0) - Фоса (0) + фсс (0)
(11-122)
Substituting Eqs. (11-102) through (11-105) into Eq. (11-122), we have
e²(t)
1 rc+joo
-
M(s) —
¿(1) = 2x; ££; {[1 − +ΜG) – M(−1)]
-
× Þrr($) + M($) M( − s)Þrr(s) } ds
s)
(11-123)
where Pr(s) is the sampled spectrum of r(t) and can be determined using
the method described in Sec. 11.3. Substituting M(s), M(-s), Pr(s), and
Þr(s) into Eq. (11-122), we can show by means of contour integration that
Фсаса (0)
= = zz; *** (1
Фсас (0) - Фсса (0)
and
Фсс (0)
=
Therefore,
e2(t)
C
2.0
1.아
​1
2ni
X
1 rc+joo
2πj
=
1
-
c-joo
-
1 - e-ST
ST
1
-
2(1 − e−woT)
-
woT
pc+j∞ (1 − e−³T)(1 − eST)
c-joo
T(1-e
-
(1
·wo T
e² (1) = 2(1
j=0.2
est
- sTw
200
ds
(11-124)
- s²
-
e-2w0T)
e
7)(1 −
ew Test) ds = 1
(11-125)
1-e-wor
(11-126)
woT
wo ∞
@0 = 0.1
1
J
5
10
15
20
25
30
00 +1
Fig. 11-13 Mean-square error versus T of the system in Example
11-2.

Sec. 11.6
417
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
The mean-square error of the system is plotted in Fig. 11-13 as a function
of wo and T. When T is equal to zero, e²(t) is also zero; when T approaches
infinity, e²(t) approaches the value 2. When T is held constant, increasing
wo will increase the mean-square error as expected.
Since many sampled-data systems utilize zero-order hold for data-recon-
struction, further investigation must be conducted on the statistical behavior
of the hold device. Referring to Fig. 11-12, we see that the actual system
consists of an ideal sampler and a zero-order hold. As Fig. 11-4a and Eq.
(11-36) indicate
when k = 0,
Þrir (kT) = — Þr
$(kT)
Þr••(0) = +$π(0)
(11-127)
(11-128)
An important result shown in Eq. (11-128) is that the mean-square value of
a sampled signal is equal to 1/T times the mean-square value of the unsampled
signal. In other words,
[r*(t)}² = = r²(t)
(11-129)
When the impulse (0) is applied to the zero-order hold, we can show by
taking the inverse transform of M(s) M(−s) that the two-sided impulse response
of the zero-order hold in the T-domain is as shown in Fig. 11-14. From this,
e
- sT )( 1 - eST)
-s2
-T
-T
T
T
Fig. 11-14 Two-sided impulse response of the zero-order hold in
the T-domain.
we conclude that the mean-square value of the output of the zero-order hold
must equal T times the mean square value of the input. Therefore,
•cc(0) = c²(t) = T[r* (t)]² = r²(t)
(11-130)
or the mean-square value of the output of a sampler-zero-order hold combi-
nation is equal to the mean-square value of the input signal. This is also
verified by the result of the integral of Eq. (11-125).
11.6 OPTIMUM SYNTHESIS USING MEAN-SQUARE
ERROR CRITERION
The principle objectives of the preceding section are the introduc-
tion of the mean-square-error criterion and the establishment of the
relationship between the statistical properties of the input and out-

418 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
put signals of sampled-data systems. In this section, we turn our
attention from analysis to synthesis. Furthermore, in all the discus-
sions of the previous section, we have neglected noise and interference
in control systems. However, noise and interference are present in
most practical control systems, and they tend to obscure the signal
used for the optimalizing control and are the basic restrictions in
the design of optimum control systems.
The statistical synthesis of sampled-data systems in the sense of
minimum mean-square error can be readily visualized by referring
to the block diagram of Fig. 11-15a. M(z) is the closed-loop transfer
M(s)
D(s).
5(1)
r(t) = rs+rn.
D(s)
H
c(t)
G(s)
e*(t)
rs(t)
e(t)
Mo(s)
Ca(t)
(a)
r(t) = rs+rn
c(t) = Cs+Cn
M(s)
rs(t)
Mo(s)
(b)
c(t)
Fig. 11-15 (a) Sampled-data system to be designed in the sense
of minimum mean-square error. (b) An equivalent system block
diagram of the system in (a).
function of the actual sampled-data system which is to be optimized
in the sense of minimum mean square error, and M,(z) is the desired
over-all system transfer function. G(s) is the transfer function of
the continuous-data portion of the system and is assumed to be
known. D*(s) or D(z) denote the transfer function of the discrete
compensator to be designed. The input signal r(t) is assumed to

:
419
Sec. 11.6
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
consist of a noise component r(t) and a signal component r.(t).
The input signal and the noise are assumed to be functions of
stationary random processes. The system output also consists of two
components; one due to rn(t) and one due to r.(t). The system
error is defined as
-
-
e(t) = ca(t) c(t) = ca(t) — cs(t) — cn(t)
—
-
(11-131)
If the system is well behaved between sampling instants, design may
be carried out based on the mean-square-sampled error e²(nT).
Since the signal r(t) − c(t) is sampled in the actual system, we can
insert a fictitious sampler at the input to M without affecting any-
thing. Therefore, the entire system can be represented by the
equivalent block diagram of Fig. 11-15b. The error sequence of the
system is given by
-
-
e(nT) = c«(nT) − c(nT) = ca(nT) — cs(nT) – c₂(nT) (11-132)
Taking the mean-square value on both sides of the last equation,
we have
e(nT) = ca(nT) + c(nT) + c(nT) + c(nT)c(nT)
+ cn(nT)cs(nT) — c.(nT)c.(nT)
-
- Ca(nT)cn(nT)
-
-
Cn(nT) canT)
-
c.(nT)ca(nT)
(11-133)
Making use of the relations between the mean-square sequence and
the sampled spectral densities, the mean-square-sampled error may
be written as
e²(nT)
=
1
2nj
§ Þee (2) z¯'dz =
1
2nj
§ [Þcos(2) + Pcx,(2)
(11-134)
-
+ Penen(2) + Pc,c. (2) + Pc,c,(z) — Pœc.(2)
- Þcsca(z) — Þcscn(2) − Pencs(2)]z¯¹dz
In view of the relationships given in Fig. 11-8, e²(nT) becomes
where
e²(nT)
=
1
2nj
f{[M(≈)M(x¯¹) + Ma(≈) Ma(2¯¹)
-
M(2) Ma(z) M(z¯¹) Ma(z)]Þ,,,(2)
+ [M(z) M(≈¯¹) — M(z) Mɑ(≈¯¹)] Pr‚‚(2)
+ [M(2)M(≈¯¹) — M(z) Mɑ(2)] Þr,,(2)
+ M(z) M(z¯¹) Pt,,(z)} z¯¹ dz
M(z) =
D(2)G(2)
1+ G(z) D(z)
(11-135)
(11-136)
The synthesis objective is to determine the transfer function M(z)
so that the mean-square-sampled error of Eq. (11-135) is a minimum.
Once the optimum M(z) is determined, the transfer function of the
digital compensator is given by

420 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
D(z) =
(2) M(2)
G(z)[1M(2)]
(11-137)
The synthesis procedure developed below is essentially an exten-
sion of the theory of optimum design of linear filters developed by
N. Wiener and A. Kolmogorofft and is also parallel to the work of
J. T. Tou. The application of the Wiener-Kolmogoroff criterion to
the design of linear continuous-data control systems is well known
and is given in the literature.§ The theory of the optimum system
design by Wiener and Kolmogoroff is based on an application of the
calculus of variations to the integral of Eq. (11-135). If M(z) is an
optimum transfer function, e²(nT) must be at a minimum. Replacing
the optimum M(2) by a function M(z) + eŋ(z) where e is a param-
eter and (2) is an arbitrary but physically realizable function of
z would increase the mean-square-sampled error to e²(nT) + ▲e²(nT)
where Ae²(nT) is the change in e²(nT). Then, a necessary condition
that e²(nT) is a minimum is
Ə[▲e²(nT)]
де
=
0
(11-138)
To insure that the Ae²(nT) is a minimum, the second derivative of
Ae²(nT) must be positive with respect to e when e = 0. Substituting
M(z) + en(z) and M(z¹) + en (2¹) for M(2) and M(≈¹), respec-
tively, in Eq. (11-135) and simplifying, we have
1
-
e²(nT) + ▲e²(nT) = e²(nT) + 27j §. €n(x) {[M(z¯') − Ma(z¯')]
Thus
× Þr,,(z) + [M(≈¯¹) — Ma(z¯¹)]Þr„„(2) + M(2¯¹) Þ,„,(2)
1
—
+ M(≈¯¹)Þr„r,(x)} x¯'dz + 27j §. en(x¯¹) {[M(2) − Mɑ(2)]
× Þr‚‚(2) + M(2)Þr,„„(2) + M(2)Þ,„,(z) + M(2)Þr„„(2)
-xxx
1
- Ma(z) Pr„.(2)} z¯¹dz + 27j §. en(z) en (2¯¹) {Þ, (2)
+ Pr‚„(2) + Þr„,(2) + Þr„tn(2)} z¯¹dz
▲e² (nT)
1
=
2πj
§, €n(z) {M(2¯¹) [P,,(2) + Prs.(2) + Prv.(2)
-
+ Pr,,(2)] – M₁(2¯¹)[P,,,(z) + Pr‚„(2)]} z¯'dz
(11-139)
† A. Kolmogoroff, Bull. Acad. Science, U. S. S. R. Ser. Math., 5, 1941, pp. 3-14.
‡ J. T. Tou, Statistical Design of Digital Control Systems," Trans. on Automatic
Control, I. R. E., Sept. 1960, pp. 290–297.
§ H. S. Tsien, Engineering Cybernetics, (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company,
Inc., 1954), Chap. 16; J.G. Truxal, Automatic Feedback Control System Synthesis,
(New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1955), Chap. 8.

Sec. 11.6
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 421
1
+ §. en(2¯¹) {M(2)[Þ,,,(2) + Þran(2) + Prat.(2) + Prata(3)]
2nj
1
Md(2)[Pr.(2) + Pr„,(z)]z¯¹dz + $, en (2) en (2-1)
2nj
× [Pr..(2) + Þran(2) + Þrw.(2) + Þr„„(2)]z¯¹dz
(11-140)
Differentiating with respect to e and setting the resultant equal to
zero yields
Ə[Ae²(nT)]
де
=0
1
=
2zj §. n(2) {M(2¯¹)Þ,,(z) — Ma(2¯¹)
-
× [Þr‚‚(2) + Þr,r.(2)]} z¯'dz + 21; §, n(z˜¯¹) {M(2) Þ,,(2)
2zj
— Ma(2)[Þr,r,(2) + Þr,,(z)]} z¯¹dz = 0
(11-141)
where Þ₁(2) = P1,7,(2) + Þ‚„„(2) + Prot.(2) + Pr„„(z) (11-142)
When Eq. (11-141) is satisfied, M(z) is an optimum. However, before
the optimum M(z) can be obtained from Eq. (11-141), the equation
must be modified. It is evident that P,,(z) is an even function of
z. Therefore, we assume that P,,(z) can be factored into two parts,
one part having poles and zeros inside the unit circle and the other
part having poles and zeros outside the unit circle. Pr(2) can be
written as
TT
Equation (11-141) is now written as
1
Þ₁(2) = P(2) Þ77(2)
27j §. n(2)Þ÷(2){M(≈¯¹) Pñ(x) – Ma(2¨¹) [P,, (2) + Þ‚¸
Ma(z¯¹)[Pt,r,(2) Þt,tr(2)
1
+
2πj
27j §, n(2¯¹) Þ¬(x) {M(2) P÷(2)
+(2)
(11-143)
P₁r,(2)]} x¯'dz
Ma(2)[Þr,,(2) + Þrs,(2)]} x¯'dz = 0 (11-144)
Φπ(2)
We can also divide each of two functions Ma(2¯¹) [Þr,(z) + Pr..(2)]/
P÷(2) and Md(2)[P,,,(2) + Prw.(2)]/Þ77(2) into the sum of two
parts; that is,
Ma(2¯¹)[Þr,,(2) + Þr,tn(2)]
and
TT
(z)
= F(2) = [F₁(2)]+ + [F,(z)] (11-145)
Md(2)[Pt,r,(2) + Pr,,(2)] = F₂(2) = [F₂(≈)]+ + [F₂(≈)]
P(2)
(11-146)
where [F(2)], and [F₂(2)], denote the parts with singularities only
inside the unit circle and [F,(z)] and [F₂(z)]. denote the parts with
singularities only outside the unit circle. Note that these notations.
are not to be confused with those of Eq. (11-143). Substitution of
Eqs. (11-145) and (11-146) into Eq. (11-144) yields

422 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
1
27j §. n(x)Þ÷(x){M(2¯¹)Þñ(x) − [F₁(x)], − [F₁(2)]-} x¯`dz
1
+
2πj
-
−
-
2zj §. n(x¯¹)Þñ(x) {M(x)Þ÷(x) − [F:(2)]. − [F;(2)]- } x¯'dz = 0
(11-147)
For reasons of stability M(z) and ŋ(z) must have poles only inside
the unit circle in the z-plane. Thus M(z¹) and (¹) are functions
with poles only outside the unit circle. Therefore, in the integrals
of Eq. (11-147),
and
1
2πj
1
· §, n ( 2 ) Þ÷ ( z ) [F₁ ( z ) ] + z¯'dz = 0
(11-148)
= 0
(11-149)
2πj §. 7(2¯¹)Þñ(x)[F:(2)]-z¯¹dz
since the integrand of the integral in Eq. (11-148) has poles only
inside the unit circle and the contour integral can be taken around
the unit circle I in the clockwise direction; and for similar reasons
the integral of (11-149) vanishes. Equation (11-147) now reads
1
2xj §, n(x)Þ÷(z) {M(≈¯¹)Þñ(x) – [F₁(2)]-} z¯'dz
+
1
27j
§, n(≈¯¹)Þ¬(2) {M(≈)Þ÷(z) − [F₂(x)+} z¯'dz = 0 (11-150)
Now if M(z) is indeed the transfer function of the optimum system,
Eq. (11-150) must be satisfied for arbitrary n(z). Thus the quanti-
ties inside the brackets of Eq. (11-150) must vanish. The optimum
transfer function is given by
1
Þrat,(2)
M(z) [F₂(2)]. = {Ma(2)[Þr,,(x) + P,,(2)]}. ; (x) (11-151)
=
Φ+(2)
Once M(z) is determined, the transfer function of the digital com-
pensator D(2) follows directly from Eq. (11-137).
Clearly the properties of the optimum system are determined
entirely by the specified system Ma(z) and the spectra P,(2),
Pr..(2), Pr..(2), and P,,(z) of the signal and noise. In the event
that noise is absent, Pr.(z) = Pr(2) = Pr√.(z) = 0,
and
PT,,(2)
=
Φ#(2) Χ Φ (2)
(11-152)
Then Eq. (11-151) gives M(z) = Ma(z) as expected, and the error
e(t) is always zero.
To illustrate the synthesis of sampled-data control systems by
means of the techniques described in the preceding paragraphs, a
simple numerical example is presented below.

Sec. 11.6
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 423
Example 11-3
Consider the sampled-data control system shown in Fig. 11-16. Assume
that
G(s) =
=
1
s(s+1)
2
PT,T,(S)
-
1
--
$2
Pr(s) = 1 (white noise) T = 0.1 second
Φτητα
and the input and noise are uncorrelated; that is, Pr(s) = P(S) = 0.
Design a digital compensator to minimize the mean-square-sampled error when
Ma(s) e-T
=
[s(t)+rn(t)
D(z)
D(s)
Gro(s)
G(s)
·c(t)
Fig. 11-16 Linear sampled-data control system to be designed in
the sense of minimum mean-square sampled error.
The z-transform of Gho(s)G(s) is
GhoG(2):
=
0.005(z + 0.9)
(x-1)(≈ 0.905)
-
The sampled spectrum of the input signal is found to be
-2z
(11-153)
PT,T,(2) =
(≈
-
0.0905) (1.1)
(11-154)
and the sampled spectrum of the noise is Pr(2) = 1.
Therefore, Pπ(2) = P1,,(2) + Pr„„(2)
Þr(2)
Dividing ,,(2) into two parts according to Eq.
-
=
(≈ — 3.732) (≈ — 0.268)
(≈
-
0.905) (z — 1.1)
(11-155)
(11-143), we have
+(2) =
Z 0.268
2
2
Φπ(2)
=
(11-156)
2
-
-
0.905
3.732
1.1
(11-157)
Therefore,
F₁₂(2)
=
Md(2)[Þr‚‚(2) + P1,1,(2)]
Φπ(2)
Now dividing Eq. (11-158) into two parts according to Eq. (11-146), we have
-2
=
(≈ − 0.905) (≈
-
3.732)
(11-158)
0.707
0.707
F₂(z) = [F₂(2)]+ + [F₂(2)]_ =
z
----
0.905 2 3.732
(11-159)
Making use of Eq. (11-151), the optimum transfer function is
M(z) =
2
0.707
0.268
(11-160)
The transfer function of the digital compensator is determined from Eq.
(11-137).

424 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
D(2) =
141.4(1)(≈ 0.905)
(≈ + 0.9)(≈ − 0.975)
-
(11-161)
By substitution of M(z) and the other known functions into Eq. (11-135),
the mean-square-sampled error of the designed system is found to be
e²(nT) = 1.16
€
(11-159)
In the preceding paragraphs synthesis of linear sampled-data control
systems is conducted on the basis of minimization of the mean-
square-sampled error. We shall now discuss a synthesis procedure
using the modified z-transform to minimize the mean-square error
e(t) of the system. Consider the sampled-data system shown in Fig.
11-17. The input signal and noise are assumed to be functions of a
(t)
r(t) = rn+rs
rs(t)
rs(t)
D*(s)
D(s)
Mo(s)
c(t) = Cs+ Cn
G(s)
e(t)
Fig. 11-17 Sampled-data control system to be designed on the
basis of minimum mean-square error.
stationary random process. The desired system transfer function is
Ma(s). D(z) is the transfer function of the digital compensator to
be determined on the basis of minimum mean-square error. The
system error is given by
e(t) = ca(t) — cs(t) — cn(t)
In terms of samples at and in between sampling instants,
e(nT, m)
=
Ca(nT, m) — cs(nT, m) — c„(nT, m)
-
Cn(nT, m)
(11-160)
(11-161)
Taking the mean-square value on both sides of Eq. (11-161), we have
e² (nT, m) = cå(nT, m) + c}(nT, m) + c{(nT, m)
+ cs(nT, m) cn(nT, m) + cn(nT, m)c,(nT, m)
-
— cɑ(nT, m)cs(nT,m) — c.(nT, m)cɑ(nT, m)
-
-
— ca(nT, m)cn(nT, m) — că(nT, m) cɑ(nT, m)
(11-162)
Through the use of Eq. (11-120), the mean-square error is given by
† J. T. Tou, “Statistical Design of Linear Discrete-Data Control Systems Via The
Modified Z-Transform Method," Journal of the Franklin Institute, 271, No. 4, April
1961, pp. 249-262.

Sec. 11.6
425
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
e² (t)
=
where
Фес (z, m)
=
2πj
§ [S' Þee (z, m)dm] z¯'dz
Þcaca(z, m) + Þc‚‚(2, m) + Þc„„(z, m)
-
+ Pc,c.(z, m) + Þc,(2, m) — Pc,(z, m)
―
-
- Pc,ca(2, m) – Pec.(z, m) — Þcca (2, m)
(11-163)
(11-164)
With reference to Fig. 11-17, the modified z-transform of the closed-
loop system may be written as
M(z, m) =
G(z, m) D(z)
1+D(z) G(z)
=
G(z, m) W(z) (11-165)
in which
W(x)
==
D(z)
1 + D(z)G(z)
(11-166)
In view of the relations of the modified spectral densities given in
Eqs. (11-113) through (11-116), the following relationships may be
written:
Placa (z, m) = 3m[Ma(s) Ma( − s)Þr,,(s)]
Фсаса
(11-167)
Фес, (z, m)
=
W(2) W(2¯¹)G(z, m)G(z¯¹, m)Þr,,(2)
(11-168)
Pcc (z, m)
=
W(2)W(z¯¹)G(z, m)G(z¯¹, m) (2)
(11-169)
Pc,c, (2, m)
=
W(2) W(2¯¹)G(z, m)G(z¯¹, m)Þr,(z)
(11-170)
Pc. (z, m) =
Фсас
W(2) W(2¯¹)G(z, m)G(z¯¹, m) Pr.(z)
m)Þr,,(z)
(11-171)
Þcc,(z, m) = W(z)G(z, m) Zm[Ma(−s)Þr‚‚(s)]
(11-172)
Феса
Þc,ca (2, m) = W(2¯')G(z¯', m) 3m[Ma(s) Pr,r,(S)]
Zm[Ma(s)Þr,r,(S)]
(11-173)
Pec(2, m)
=
W(2)G(z, m) 3m[Ma(-s) Þr,r,($)]
(11-174)
(11-175)
Pcs (2, m) = W(2¯¹)G(2¯', m) 3m[Ma(S)Þr„r,(S)]
Substituting Eqs. (11-167) through (11-175) into Eq. (11-163) and
simplifying yields
1
e°(t) = 2; §. {A,(z) + W(2)W(2¯¹)A:(2)Þr,(2)
-
W(2)[A3(2¯¹) + A₁(≈¯¹)]
W(2)[A3(2) + A₁(z)]}≈¯¹dz
(11-176)
in which
A₁(2) = √,' 3m[Ma(S) M«( − s)Þ,,,(s)]dm
(11-177)
A:(z) = ſ' G(z, m)G(z¯¹, m)dm
(11-178)
A₁(x) = f' G(x¯¹, m)
S' G(z¯', m) } m[Md(S)Þ,,,(s)]dm
(11-179)
A₁(≈) = f' G(≈¯¹,
'G(2¯', m) 3 m[Ma(s)Þr..($)]dm
(11-180)
and (2) is given by Eq. (11-142).

426 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
The Wiener-Kolmogoroff theory can now be applied to Eq. (11-
176) so that an optimum D(z) may be determined. The condition
for minimizing e²(t) is determined by giving W(z) a small variation
en (z). Therefore, when W(z) and W(z¹) are replaced by W(z) +
en(z) and W(2¯¹) + en(z¯¹), respectively, the mean-square error will
increase to e(t) + Ae²(t). Then a necessary condition for e²(t) to
be a minimum is
Әде² (t)
де
= 0
E=0
(11-181)
The minimization procedure bears a close resemblance to the mini-
mization of the mean-square-sampled error. The essential steps are
to divide (2) into two parts according to Eq. (11-143) and to
divide A,(z) into A(z) A(z) in the same manner. The optimum
transfer function W(z) when e²(t) is a minimum is readily obtained
as
1
W(x) = [As(2) + A((2)]. × p÷(x)Aï(z)
+
(11-182)
in which {[As (2) + A₁(2)]/Þñ(z) A₂ (z)}+ denotes the part of [A,(z)
+ A₁(2)]/Þñ(2) A5 (z) having singularities only inside the unit circle;
that is,
A3(x) + A₁(≈)
Þ(2) A₂ (2)
=
A3(2) A₁(z) A₁(2) + A₁(2)
4,(x) + A1(x)] + [ A³(2) + Ai(z
+
(2)
(11-183)
The details of the derivation of Eq. (11-182) are left to the reader
as an exercise.
To illustrate the synthesis of sampled-data control systems by
means of the modified z-transform technique, a single numerical
example is given below.
Example 11-4
Assume that for the system of Fig. 11-17,
1- e-ST
G(s):
-
s(s + 1)
Ma(s) = 1
1 T = 0.2 sec.
2
PT,T,(S)
=
-
S
Pr(s) = 0.1 (white noise)
=
the signal and noise are uncorrelated so that Pr(s) Φτητα (5) = 0. The
object is to design an optimum digital compensator so that the mean- square
error of the system is at a minimum. The z-transform of Pr‚7,(s) is
Pr..(2)
=
༤
-0.2013z
1.221) (z
(11-184)
-
-0.819)
Therefore,
Pr(2) = P(2) + Pr(2) =
0.1(≈
(≈
-
0.261) (z
1.221) (≈
3.791)
0.819)
(11-185)

Sec. 11.6
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 427
Dividing (2) into two parts according to Eq. (11-143), we have
Φ#(2)
0.316(≈ 0.261)
=
-
༤ -0.819)
P(2) =
0.316(≈ 3.791)
-
(≈ — 1.221)
(11-186)
(11-187)
The modified z-transform of G(s) is
1
G(z, m)
(≈ − 1)e-0.2m
-
༤ 2(≈ 0.819)
(11-188)
Thus
A₂(≈) = f' G(z, m)G(z¯¹, m) dm = −0.007(z + 0.305) (≈ + 3.274)
(≈ — 0.819)(≈
-
1.221)
(11-189)
Diving A(z) into two parts, we have
A(z) =
0.0835(≈ 0.305)
༤
―
(≈ 0.819)
and
A₂ (2) =
−0.0835(≈ + 3.274)
-
(≈ − 1.221)
(11-190)
(11-191)
The modified z-transform of Þ,,,(s) is found as follows:
1
--?
Zm[Þr,r,(5)] = Pr,r.(≈, m) = + 3m[Þr,r,(5)]+ + + 3m[Þrr.(5)]-
-0.2m
-
T
Pr..(0) = 5
e
+2
-0.2m
-0.2
2-1] (11-192)
Substituting Eq. (11-192) and G(z, m) into Eq. (11-179), we have
As(z) = f' G(z¯¹, m) Þr,r.(z, m) dm = 0.045(≈ + 2.465) (≈² − 1.2≈ + 0.5)
0.819) (z
1.221)2
(11-193)
Therefore,
A₁(2)
(2) A (2)
−1.7(≈ + 2.465)(≈² — 1.2≈ + 0.5)
=
-
(≈ − 0.819)(≈ − 3.74)(≈ + 3.274)
(11-194)
A(z)
Þ77(2) A₂ (≈)
55].
0.0875
=
(11-195)
-
0.819
It follows from Eq. (11-182) that
W(≈)
=
32.2(≈
0.819)
(11-196)
(≈ − 0.261)(≈ + 0.305)
The transfer function of the desired digital compensator is given by
D(≈)
=
W()
1- W(~)G(≈)
=
32.2(≈ 0.819)
(≈ + 2.45)(≈ − 2.41)
-
(11-197)
Although D(≈) represents an unstable controller, it still can be realized by a
feedback-series pulse-data network using the techniques discussed in Sec. 9.2.
The physical realizability and stability of the system transfer function M(2)
are ensured when the part of the function in Eq. (11-182) is chosen with
poles only inside the unit circle in the z-plane. However, according to Eq.
(11-197), D(z) may still turn out to have poles outside the unit circle.

428 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Chap. 11
REFERENCES
Bergen, A. R., "On the Statistical Design of Linear Random Sampling Systems,”
Proc. of the International Federation of Automatic Control, Moscow, 1960,
pp. 126–131.
Blum, M., “An Extension of the Minimum Mean Square Prediction Theory
For Sampled-Input Signals," Trans. I. R. E. on Information Theory, Vol.
IT-2, September 1956, pp. 176-184.
Brogen, J., "Filters for Sampled Signals," Proc. of the Information Theory
Symposium, Brooklyn Polytechnic Inst., 1954.
Chang, S. S. L., "Statistical Design Theory For Strictly Digital Sampled-Data
Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 77, Part 1, February 1958, pp. 702-709.
DeRusso, P. M., "Ultimate Performance Limitations of Linear Sampled-Data
Systems," M. I. T. Electric System Lab. Report 7843-R-3, June 1959.
Hung, J. C., "Double Measurement With Both Sampled and Continuous In-
puts," I. R. E. Convention Records, Part 4, 1962.
Franklin, G. F., "Linear Filtering of Sampled-Data," Technical Report T-51B,
Columbia University Electronics Research Lab., New York, December 1954.
Franklin, G. F., "The Optimum Synthesis of Sampled-Data Systems," Techni-
cal Report T-61B, Columbia University Electronics Research Lab., New
York, 1955.
Johnson, G. N., "Statistical Analysis of Sampled-Data Systems," I.R. E.
WESCON Convention Record, Part 4, 1957, pp. 187-195.
Johnson, K. R., "Optimum Linear Discrete Filtering of Signals Containing a
Nonrandom Component," I. R. E. Trans. on Information Theory, Vol. IT-2,
No. 2, June 1956, pp. 49-55.
Kalman, R. E., "Analysis and Synthesis of Linear Systems Operating on
Randomly Sampled-Data," doctoral dissertation, Columbia University, New
York, 1957.
Kinnen, E., and Tou, J. T., “Analysis of Nonlinear Sampled-Data Control
Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 75, Part 2, 1960.
Kolmogoroff, A., Bull, Acad. Science, U.S.S. R. Ser. Math., 5, 1941, pp. 3–14.
Lees, A. B., "Interpolation and Extrapolation of Sampled-Data," I. R. E. Trans.
on Information Theory, Vol. IT-2, March 1956, pp. 12-17.
Lloyd, S. P., and McMillan, B., "Linear Least Square Filtering and Prediction
of Sampled Signals," Proc. of Symposium on Modern Network Synthesis,
Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute, April 1955.
Mori, M., "Statistical Treatment of Sampled-Data Control Systems for Actual
Random Inputs," Trans. A. S. M. E., Vol. 80, No. 2, February 1958, pp.
444-456.

Sec. 11.6
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 429
Sittler, R. W., "System Analysis of Discrete Markov Processes," I. R. E. Trans.
on Circuit Theory, Vol. CT-3, No. 4, December 1956, pp. 257–265.
Sklansky, J., “On Closed-form Expansions For Mean Squares in Discrete-
continuous Systems," I. R. E, Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. PGAC-4, 1958.
Sobral, M., “Statistical Design of Linear Multivariable Sampled-Data Feed-
back Control System," Coordinated Science Lab. Report R-132, University
of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, February 1962.
Stewart, R. M., “Statistical Design and Evaluation of Filters for the Restora-
tion of Sampled-data," Proc. I. R. E., 44, No. 2, February 1956, pp. 253-257.
Tou, J. T., "Statistical Design of Digital Control Systems," I. R. E. Trans. on
Automatic Control, September 1960, pp. 290–297.
Tou, J. T., "Statistical Design of Linear Discrete-Data Control Systems Via
The Modified z-transform Method," Journal of Franklin Institute, 271, No. 4,
April 1961, pp. 246-262.
Tou, J. T., and Kumar, K. S. P., "Statistical Design of Discrete-Data Control
Systems Subject to Power Limitation," Journal of Franklin Institute, 272,
No. 3, September 1961, pp. 171-184.
Trembath, N. W., “Random Signal Analysis of Linear and Nonlinear Sampled-
Data Systems," M. I. T., DACL Report 108, 1957.
Tsien, H. S., Engineering Cybernetics, Chap. 16, (New York: McGraw-Hill
Book Company, Inc., 1954).
Wiener, N., "The Extrapolation, Interporation, and Smoothing of Stationary
Times Series," (New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1948).
Zadeh, L. A., and Ragazzini, J. R., “An Extension of Wiener's Theory of
Prediction," Journal of Applied Physics, 21, July 1950, pp. 645-655.

12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA
CONTROL SYSTEMS
12.1 INTRODUCTION
Problems occurring in practice originally stimulated interest in
the study of sampled-data systems containing nonlinear elements.
As in systems with continuous signals, account must often be taken
of physical imperfections such as saturation, backlash, dead zone,
and hysteresis of components in sampled-data systems. Most physical
systems can be considered linear only within a limited range of
their operations. If a sampled-data system is designed according to
the linear theories and methods discussed in the preceding chapters,
the components used in the system must operate in linear fashions
under various operating conditions. If under certain circumstances
the components are driven into regions of nonlinear characteristics,
linear design theory describes the system performance only approxi-
mately or quite often gives a completely erroneous prediction of it.
Broadly speaking, a nonlinear system is one for which the
principle of superposition is no longer valid. In linear systems
mathematical analysis is characterized by the fact that if the separate
application of inputs ri(t) and r2(t) produces responses c₁(t) and
c2(t) respectively, the simultaneous application of signals ri(t) and
r2(t) will produce an output c₁(t) + c₂(t). This is why in linear
systems, system response need be analyzed only to the deterministic
type of signals such as the step function, ramp function, acceleration
430

Sec. 12.1
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 431
function, and the sine function. These signals can then be combined
to approximate signals of almost any kind. Unfortunately, this
unique property of superposition does not carry over to nonlinear
systems. This fact is also a basic reason why nonlinear differential
equations (nonlinear difference equations for sampled-data systems)
are more difficult to solve and thus require special attention. At
present, no definite set of mathematical tools exists to solve a general
class of nonlinear systems with either sampled or continuous data.
Furthermore, when sampling and nonlinearity are present in the
same system, new phenomena arise which can hardly be described by
the theories and techniques of linear sampled-data systems or by
that of nonlinear system without sampling. The interaction between
sampling and nonlinearity brings about a whole class of complicated
and unexpected problems.
Although nonlinearities in feedback control systems generally are
due to shortcomings of physical components, in one class of systems
nonlinear elements are intentionally introduced in order to improve
system performance. In systems with continuous-data, the on-off or
relay-type servot such as the automobile voltage regulators and on-off
furnace controls are common examples of this class of nonlinear
system. The concept of relay control is also extended to sampled-
data systems. Actually, with the addition of the sampling switch,
nonlinear control of sampled-data systems becomes more versatile;
several investigators have recently suggested the pulse-width controlt
which is a modified version of the ordinary relay control in which
continuous control is exercized over the duration of the full positive
or negative correction applied by the relay to the controlled system
during each sampling period.
Two well-known methods, which have proved both useful and
popular in the study of continuous-data nonlinear feedback control
systems, are the describing function and the phase-plane methods.
† H. L. Hazen, "Theory of Servomechanism," J. Franklin Inst., September 1934;
H. R. Weiss, "Analysis of Relay Servomechanisms," J. Aeronaut. Sci., July 1946;
D. A. Kahn, “An Analysis of Relay Servomechanisms," Trans. A.I.E.E., 1949.
R. F. Nease, "Analysis and Design of Nonlinear Sampled-Data Control Systems,"
WADC Tech. Note 57-162, Servomechanisms Lab., Massachusetts Inst. of Tech., June
1957.
W. L. Nelson, “Pulse Width Control of Sampled-Data Systems,” Tech. Report T-35/B,
Columbia University, July 1959.
R. J. Kochenburger, “A Frequency Response Method for Analyzing and Synthesizing
Contactor Servomechanisms," Trans. A.I.E.E., 69, 1950, Part 1 pp. 270-34.
A. A. Andronow, and C. E. Chaikin, Theory of Oscillations trans. Lefschetz, S.,
(Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 1949).

432 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
Also, the first published studies of nonlinear control systems with
sampled-data are the extensions of these two above mentioned
methods. For systems which have low-pass frequency response chara-
cteristics, the possible unstable behavior of the systems may be
assumed to consist of periodic, quasi-sinusoidal oscillations approxi-
mated by their first harmonic component. The method is essentially
a steady-state analysis; it does not give any information on the
transient behavior of the system. On the other hand, the phase
method may be regarded as a direct study of the system difference
equations. The phase plane diagram gives indication of both the
transient and the steady-state behavior of a system in the time
domain. However, as is well known, the major limitations of the
phase plane technique are that only second-order systems (or higher-
order systems which can be approximated by second-order systems)
can be effectively studied by the method, since for high-order systems
the phase space becomes difficult to visualize, and it cannot be
extended to systems with sinusoidal inputs.
12.2 ANALYSIS OF NONLINEAR SAMPED-DATA SYSTEMS
BY STATE TRANSITION TECHNIQUE
The state transition technique can also be used for the analysis
and synthesis of sampled-data control systems with nonlinear ele-
ments. Essentially the technique makes use of the variable gain
concept described in Sec. 9.9. Consider the block diagram of the
nonlinear system shown in Fig. 12-1. We shall use this basic con-
figuration to describe the development of the analysis procedure of
the state transition technique.
As shown in Fig. 12-1. the input to the nonlinear element N is
h(t) and the output is m(t). The nonlinearity may be represent-
r(t)
h(t)
m(t)
x₁(t) = c(t)
z.o.h.
N
G₁(s)
Nonlinear
Linear
element
controlled
process
Fig. 12-1 Block diagram of sampled-data control system with
nonlinear element.
† R. E. Kalman, "Nonlinear Aspects of Sampled-Data Control Systems," Proc. of
the Symposium on Nonlinear Circuit Analysis, 6, Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute,
New York, 1956.
C. K. Chow, "Contactor Servomechanisms Employing Sampled-Data," Trans.
A. I. E. E., 73, Part 2, 1954, pp. 51-64.

Sec. 12.2
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 433
Variable gain
amplifier
K(10)
r(10)
h(t)
m(1)
M(s)
x₁(10)
x()
1
Transition flowi
graph of linear
Lelements
X₁(s) = C(s)
Fig. 12-2 Transition flow graph of the nonlinear sampled-data
control system in Fig. 12-1.
ed by a variable gain amplifier with gain K(kT)=K₁ during the
sampling period kT <t≤ (k + 1)T. K is defined as
k
Kk
=
m(kT+)
h(kT+)
(12-1)
and the value of K depends upon the characteristic of the nonlinear
element N and will have different values during different sampling
periods. Based on the above arrangement, the state transition flow
graph of the system in Fig. 12-1, is constructed in Fig. 12-2, and the
transition equations are written in the following vector-matrix form:
V[(t − to), K(to)]xı(to) + ✪[(t − to), K(to)]r(t。)
x(t)
=
-
When t = (k + 1)T and to = kT, Eq. (12-2) becomes
(12-2)
(12-3)
x[(k + 1)T] = ¥(T, Kk)x₁(kT) + ✪(T, Kx) r(kT)
The values of K in the last equation are given by Eq. (12-1), in
which h(kT+) is determined from
h(kT+) = r(kT) − x₁(kT)
-
(12-4)
and m(kT+) is determined from the nonlinear characteristics once
h(kT+) is known. Once the values of K during each sampling
period are determined, Eq. (12-3) gives the solution of all the state
variables at the sampling instants.
The analysis procedure is best illustrated by a numerical example.
Example 12-1
=
Consider that in the nonlinear sampled-data system of Fig. 12-1, G₁(s)
· 1/s(s + 1); and the nonlinearity is a relay with dead zone and with its
input-output characteristics described by
m(t) =
+1
1
h(t) 0.1 D
≥
=
h(t) -0.1 = -D
(12-5)
0 -0.1 < h(t) < 0.1

434 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
=
The sampling period is one second. Determine the output response of the
system when the input r(t) is zero and the initial conditions are x₁(0) = 0.138
and x(0) : 0.762. The state transition flow graph of the system is drawn
in Fig. 12-3. Note that this flow graph is identical to that of Fig. 9-42, which
is for a linear system with digital controller. As was mentioned previously,
the variable gain concept may be applied to a general class of elements, such
as nonlinear elements, time-varying elements, linear digital controllers, etc.
Therefore, the transition equations of the nonlinear system are identical to
those of Eqs. (9-240) and (9-241); that is,
K(10)
1
r(10)
e(*)
h(t) H(s)
8x2(10)
(x₁(10)
8x2(10+)
0x₁ (10+)
s-1
X2(s)
X₁(s)
-1
Fig. 12-3 State transition flow graph of the nonlinear system in
Example 12-1.
x₁[(k + 1)T] = [1 − K₁(T − 1 + e−7)]x,(kT) + (1 − e−¹)x2(kT)
-
+ K(T-1+ e¯T)r(kT)
x2[(k + 1)T] = −Kx(1 − e−™)x₁(kT) + e¯ˆx₂(kT)
-
+ Kx(1-e)r(kT)
For T 1 second and r(kT) = 0, Eqs. (12-6) and (12-7) read
x₁[(k + 1)T] = (1 − 0.368K)î¸(kT) + 0.632x2(kT)
-
x2[(k + 1)T] = −0.632K¸x₁(kT) + 0.368x½(kT)
(12-6)
(12-7)
(12-8)
(12-9)
For k = 0, h(0+) = −x,(0) = 0.138, thus m(0+) = 1, and from Eq.
(12-1), K。 = 7.25. Substitution of these quantities and the initial conditions
into Eq. (12-8) and (12-9) yields
-
x₁(T) = (1 0.368K)x, (0) + 0.632.x,(0) = 0.252
(12-10)
x2(T)
=
0.632Kx1(0) + 0.368.x₂(0)
= -0.352
(12-11)
Therefore,
h(T+) = −x₁(T)
= -0.252
(12-12)
=
-1 and K₁ = 3.97. Substitution of k
=
=
1 and
from which, we have m(T+)
the values of K₁, x,(T) and x(T) into Eqs. (12-8) and (12-9) yields
x₁(2T) = −0.338 and x2(2T) -0.762. Following the same procedure, the
responses x and x2 can be calculated through any desired number of sampling
periods. The results for the first eight sampling periods are computed and
tabulated in the following:

Sec. 12.2
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 435
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
k
(kT)
x2(kT)
0.138 0.252 -0.338 -0.452
0.762 -0.352
ho(kT+) -0.138 -0.252
0.138 0.252 -0.338 -0.452 0.138
-0.762
0.352
0.762 -0.352 -0.762 0.352 0.762
0.333
0.452
-0.138 -0.252 0.333
0.452 -0.138
m(kT+) -1
-1
+1
+1
-1
-1
+1
+1
-1
Kk
7.25
3.97
2.96
2.21
7.25
3.97
2.96
2.21
7.25
m(t)
0.4
0.2
c(1) O
AAAAAS
AAAAAAA
-0.25
-0.4
-0.6
227
24T
1
Fig. 12-4 Output response and relay output signal of nonlinear
(relay type with dead zone) sampled-data system shown in Fig.
12-1. G(s) = 1/s(s + 1), relay dead zone D = 0.1; initial condi-
tions (0) = 0.138, x(0) = 0.762. The output response is un-
stable, and the period of self-sustained oscillation is Te = 4T.
The output signal m(t) of the relay and the system output response are plotted
in Fig. 12-4. For the given initial conditions, the nonlinear sampled-data
system has a periodic steady-state solution of period 4T. The relay output
has two consecutive corrections in the positive direction and two in the
negative direction.
It is both interesting and instructive to find the plots of the system output
c(t) due to different initial conditions. When the initial conditions of x₁(0)
= −0.1 and x,(0) = 0.6 are assumed, the nonlinear system has an autonomous
periodic response of period 6T. This is equivalent to saying that the dif-
ference equations that describe the nonlinear system have a periodic solution
of period 6T. Similarly, by assigning various other combinations of x,(0)
and x(0) as initial conditions of the system, other possible modes of sustained
oscillations are discovered. When x,(0) = 0.1, and x,(0) = 0.4, the period of
oscillation of c(t) is 4T, and the relay output signal has one correction in
the positive direction and one in the negative direction during each cycle.
For x₁(0) = -0.4 and x2(0) = 1.2, the sustained oscillation in c(t) has a
period of 5T. We shall see in a later section that with T = 1 second and
relay dead zone D = 0.1, the modes mentioned above are the only possible

436
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
m(t)
0.4
0.2
27
HAAAAAA
-0.2
-0.4
87
(a)
24T
m(t)
+1
C(1)
1.0t
0.8
0.6
0.4
Am
0.2
27 4T
8T IOT 12T
-0.2
6T
-0.4
-0.6
14T
187 207 22T 24T
167
(b)
Fig. 12-5 Output response and relay output signal of nonlinear
(relay type with dead zone) sampled-data system shown in Fig.
12-1. G₁(s) = 1/s(s + 1), relay dead zone D = 0.1; initial condi-
tions: (a) x,(0) = 0.1, x2(0) = 0.4; self-sustained oscillation,
period T 4T. (b) x₁(0) = 0.4, x(0) = 1.2; self-sustained
oscillation, period T = 5T
=
-
modes of self-sustained oscillations that may occur in this particular nonlinear
system with sampled-data. The waveforms of m(t) and c(t) corresponding
to these various initial conditions are plotted in Fig. 12-5.
Stable operation of the system can be obtained by increasing the size of
the relay dead zone. For instance, if the relay dead zone is increased to 0.6,
we can show that the initial conditions used above will all lead to stable
responses. Figure 12-6 shows two typical stable responses and the corresponding
relay output signals for the assumed initial conditions.

Sec. 12.3
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 437
m(1)
+1
c(1)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
187
24T
AAAAA
-0.2
-0.4
- 0.6
- 0.8
127
2T 4T
8T OT
147 16T 20T 227 26T 28T 1
-1.아
​(c)
Fig. 12-5 (c) Output response and relay output signal of non-
linear (relay type with dead zone) sampled-data system shown
in Fig. 12-1. G(s) = 1/s(s + 1), relay dead zone D = 0.1; initial
conditions: x₁(0) = 0.1, x2(0) = 0.6, self-sustained oscillation
period T 6T.
=
The state transition technique can be used to synthesize certain
restricted types of nonlinear sampled-data control systems. In this
case, the required digital controller and the nonlinear element are re-
presented by a variable gain amplifier. However, because of the non-
linear aspect of the system the state transition technique cannot be
relied upon to provide a design solution for all nonlinear systems.
12.3 THE PHASE PLANE METHOD
Phase plane method is a graphical technique of solving linear
and nonlinear differential equations. However, phase plane method
has been applied to control systems predominantly in the studies of
nonlinear systems simply because the Laplace transform method of
solving linear differential equations is so convenient and straight-
† J. T. Tou, B. Vadhanaphuti, op. cit.

438
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
m(t)
0
1.5
1.0
c(t)
0.5
3T
6T 7T
O
T
2T
4T 5T
8T 9T IOT IIT 12T
- 0.5
-1.아
​m(t)
1.0-
1.0
0.5
c(t)
O
(a)
T 2T 3T 4T 5T 6T 7T 8T 97 IOT IIT 12T
(b)
t
Fig. 12-6 Stable output responses of nonlinear (relay type with
dead zone) sampled-data system shown in Fig. 12-1. G₁(s) =
1/s(s + 1), (a) x₁(0) = 1.5, x½(0) = 0.5 (b) x,(0) = 0.6, x½(0)
= 0.4.
forward that there seems to be no advantage in applying the graph-
ical method to linear systems.
If a second-order system is characterized by the dependent varia-
ble c(t) and its first derivative with respect to time dc(t)/dt, the
phase plane diagram of the system is a plot of de/dt as a function
of c. At any time t₁, the coordinate [c(t₁), dc(t)/dt\-] in the phase
plane determines the "state" of the system at tt. As time is
varied from 0 to ∞, the representing point (c, c') will trace out
a continuous path which indicates the complete history of the sys
tem in regard to c and c' at all times; the path itself is called the
phase plane trajectory. For instance, in a servo system the phase
tc' represents the first derivative of c(t) with respect to time.

Sec. 12.3
439
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
V=C'
14
12
0|1=0
C=R=1
Maximum
overshoot
Maximum
overshoot
(a)
13
(b)
Fig. 12-7 Phase plane diagram and the corresponding step
response of a second-order servo system.
plane diagram is usually a plot of the output velocity c' as a func-
tion of the output displacement c. In Fig. 12-7 the typical phase plane
diagram and the corresponding output response of a second-order
servo system with unit step function input are shown. The arrows
on the phase plane trajectory indicate the increase in time. For an
electrical network a plot of current i as a function of electric charge
q also forms a phase plane diagram.
The phase plane concept may also be extended to higher order
systems or differential equations. However, the representation of the
state of the system for higher order systems requires higher-dimen-

440
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
sional plots. This is usually the main difficulty in applying phase
plane technique to systems with order higher than two, since a mul-
tidimensional "phase space" diagram is very difficult to visualize
and construct. In addition to the above-mentioned limitation, the
phase plane technique is normally used to study only transient and
steady-state performances of systems subject to only step function
and linear time function inputs and/or with initial conditions. For
continuous-data systems, we know that the phase plane technique
does not solve problems involving systems with sinusoidally excited
systems. However, we shall show in this chapter that it is possible
to apply the phase plane method to sampled-data systems with sine.
wave inputs.
Phase Plane Trajectories of Linear Systems with Continuous-Data
At this point, we shall briefly review the construction of phase
plane diagrams for linear second-order systems with continuous-data.
Consider that the open-loop transfer function of a linear second-
order system with unity-feedback is given by
T =
G(s)
C(s)
=
=
=
Km
=
K
E(s) ¯¯ ƒs(1 + ST) S(1 + ST)
(12-13)
where Jf inertia/friction, and K = Km/f. The differential equa-
tion that describes the relation between the input and the output
variables of the closed-loop system may be written as
Kr(t) = T
d²c(t) dc(t)
dt2
+
+ Kc(t)
(12-14)
dt
Making the substitution of
dc
v=
(12-15)
dt
dv
d2c
dv dc
dv
and
v'
-
-
dt
dt2 dc dt
X = v
(12-16)
dc
dv
Kr = TV
dc
into Eq. (12-14) yields
where r, v, and c, are all functions of time. Solving for dv/dc in Eq.
+v+ Kc
(12-17)
(12-17), we have
dv
dc
1
K(rc)
= ―
+
T
UT
(12-18)
Eq. (12-18) represents an analytic expression for the slope of a
trajectory in the c-v plane. If we consider that the reference input
to the system is a unit step function, one trajectory exists in the

Sec. 12.3
441
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Isocline
V=C'I
(slope = -K)
a=0
Isocline
(slope = ∞)
Isocline
(slope < 0)
v = c'
C=R=1
(a)
c=R=1
(b)
0=-1/T
Isocline (slope > 0)
·0<-1/T
Phase plane trajectory
Isocline (slope =0)
a=dv/dc=∞
dv/dc=d=0
Phase plane trajectory
v=c'
σ=1/T
α=0
C
о
α=∞
Phase plane trajectory
c=R=1
(c)
Fig. 12-8 Phase plane trajectories of a second-order system with
a unit-step function input and zero initial conditions. (a) ƒ> 0,
stable system; (b) f = 0, sustained oscillation; (c) f< 0, un-
stable system.

442 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
Characteristic Eq.
root locations
X
X
Ajw
s-plane
Phase plane
trajectory
审
​Transient response
れ
​4jw
s-plane
2
Ο
s-plane
(a)
(b)
c(t) 3
c(t)
(c)
Fig. 12-9 Phase plane trajectories of a second-order linear system.
phase plane to each set of initial conditions c(0), v(0). Frequent-
ly, the phase plane trajectories are sketched by finding the lines on
which the trajectories have the same slope dv/dc; these lines are
called the "isoclines "t of the phase plane trajectories. For instance,
by setting dvdc to zero in Eq. (12-18), we have
-
K(r− c) — v = 0
(12-19)
which represents a straight line passing through the real axis in the
phase plane at c = r = 1 with a slope of -K. Therefore, any phase
† A. A. Andronow, and C. E. Chaikin, Theory of Oscillations, trans. Lefschetz, S.,
(Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 1949).

Sec. 12.3
443
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Characteristic Eq.
root locations
s-plane
Phase plane
trajectory
AC'
Transient response
F&M
(d)
jw
s-plane
(e)
c(t)
Ajw
s-plane
F
C'
ΟΙ
0
3
(f)
2
1
Fig. 12-9 Phase plane trajectories of a second-order linear system.
plane trajectory that intersects this line must have a slope of zero
at the intersecting point. Similarly, for any constant slope σ of the
trajectory in the phase plane, Eq. (12-18) gives
dv
de
=σ =
1 +
K(rc)
T
UT
After simplification, Eq. (12-20) reads
ข =
K(r - c)
1 + στ
(12-20)
(12-21)
Equation (12-21) represents the equation of the isoclines in the phase
plane for this particular system. All phase plane trajectories that in-

444 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
=
0, το
=
tersect the same isocline, have the same slope σ at the intersections.
Figure 12-8a shows the isoclines for several significant values of
and the phase plane trajectory when the input is a unit-step func-
tion and has zero initial conditions (co
0). The arrows on
the trajectory indicate the increase in time. From this phase plane
trajectory, the transient response of the system is clearly oscillato-
ry and finally the response reaches a steady-state value of c = 1. If
the viscous friction coefficient of the system is made equal to zero,
the differential equation of the system becomes
Km(rc)
=
d2c
dt2
(12-22)
Then, the isoclines in the phase plane are represented by
v = Km(r − c)/Jo
(12-23)
Equation (12-23) represents straight lines with slopes that are equal
to -Km/Jo and pass through the point (c = 1, v = 0) in the phase
plane. For the same value of a but with opposite signs, the isoclines
are symmetrical with respect to the isocline for σ = 0 (the c = R=1
line). The corresponding phase plane trajectory with zero initial
conditions is elliptical in form as shown in Fig. 12-8b. For a nega-
tive viscous friction coefficient, the system is unstable. Clearly the
phase plane trajectory will circle outward and eventually go to in-
finity (Fig. 12-8c).
Singular Points
The points (c = 1, v = 0) in the phase plane diagrams of Fig.
12-18 are called the singular points of the phase plane trajectories.
A singular point may generally be classified as a focus point, a sad-
dle point, or a vortex. The classification depends entirely on the
variations of the coefficients of the differential equation or the roots
of the characteristic equation. For instance, the singular point in
Fig. 12-18b is a vortex; and the singular point in Fig. 12-18c is an
unstable focus point.
If in Eq. (12-14) r(t) = 0,
Jdc + f de + Kmc = 0
dc
dt2 dt
(12-24)
The origin in the phase plane diagram becomes the only singular
point. The relationship among the coefficients and the roots of Eq.
(12-24) for each type of singularity is given in Table 12-1.

Sec. 12.3
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 445
Km > 0
f>0
f<2/JKm
TABLE 12-1
Two complex conjugate roots
with negative real parts
Stable
focus
Km>0
f<0
f<2/JKm
Two complex conjugate roots
Unstable
with positive real parts
focus
Km > 0
f = 0
Two imaginary roots
Vortex
Km > 0
f>0
f>2/JK
Two negative real roots
Stable
node
Km > 0
Km
<0
f<0
f=0
f> /JKm
Two positive real roots
Unstable
node
Two real roots with opposite
signs
Saddle
point
The phase plane trajectories, location of roots of the characteristic
equation in the s-plane, and the corresponding transient responses
of the six cases given in Table 12-1 are illustrated in Fig. 12–9.
Phase Plane Trajectories of Relay-Type Control Systems with
Sampled-Datat
The relay-type control system with sampled-data in Example 12-1
will now be studied by means of the phase plane technique. The
analysis is limited to second-order systems only. Therefore, we consider
the transfer function of the controlled process as
G₁(s)
=
1
s(s + 1)
(12-25)
m(1+)
M(s)
=
[x2(to)
x2(to) = vo
[x (1%) = Co
1
x2(10+)
1
EF
。་;
X2(s) =V(s)
- 1
1
S
X₁(s) = C(s)
Fig. 12-10 State transition flow graph of
G₁(s)
=
1
s(s + 1)
† F. J. Mullin, E. I. Jury. "Phase-Plane Approach to Relay Sampled-Data Systems,"
Trans. A. I. E. E., Part 2, January 1959, pp. 517-524.
W. Altar, C. W. Helstrom, "Phase Plane Representation of Sampling Servomecha-
nisms," Research Report R-94410-14-B, Westinghouse Research Lab., Pittsburgh, Pa.,
September 1953.

446 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
Although the time constant T and the gain K in Eq. (12-25) are
assumed to be unity, extension of the following analysis can be made
easily to any second-order system in which 7 and K are nonunity.
With the notations of Fig. 12-1, the transition flow graph of the
linear controlled process is shown in Fig. 12-10. The input signal
is m(to) which is the output of the relay in the nonlinear system.
The state transition equations for the open-loop system are:
x(t) = c(t) = [(t − to) - 1 + e¯-to)] m (to) + x₁(to)
—
-
+ [1 − e (-b)] x2 (to)
x2(t) = v(t)
= v(t) = el-lo) x₂(to) + [1 - e-l-lo)]m(to)
(12-26)
(12-27)
where x(to) = co and x(to)=vo. Equation (12-26) can also be
written in terms of v(t). Therefore,
Solving for t to in Eq. (12-27) yields
(12-28)
x₁(t) = c(t) = (t − to) m(to) + co + vo - v(t)
(t - to)
= - In
[
m(to) - v
m(to) - vo.
(12-29)
where for simplicity v(t) is denoted by v. Substituting Eq, (12-29)
into Eq. (12-28), we have
ln
c = co + vo V
-
m(to) Inm(1)
m(to) vo.
m(to) - v
(12-30)
—

m=+1
mn=-1-
m=+1
-1
G(s) = 1/s(s + 1)
Fig. 12-11 Phase plane trajectories for relay-type system with
mn+1 and -1.
C

Sec. 12.3
447
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
or
-
Co= - (v — v。) — m(tô) ln
[;
m(to)
m(to) Vo.
-
(12-31)
Equation (12-31) describes the phase plane trajectory of the re-
lay-type control system between the states of (co, vo) and (c,v) for
a given m(to). The phase plane trajectories for m(t) = +1 and -1
are plotted in Fig. 12-11 for various initial conditions. The corres-
ponding values of v according to Eq. (12-31) when c is varied from
O to ∞ with m(tő) = + 1 and zero initial conditions are tabulated in
Table 12-2. The data given in Table 12-2 correspond to the m(t*) =
+1 trajectory which passes through the origin in Fig. 12-11. For non-
zero initial conditions the trajectory must pass through the point
(co, vo) in the phase plane. The phase plane trajectory for m(t)
=
TABLE 12-2
V
с
v
C
บ
с
0.1
0.0054
1.05
1.95
-0.2
0.018
0.2
0.023
1.10
1.20
-0.4
0.064
0.3
0.057
1.20
0.41
-0.5
0.095
0.4
0.112
1.28
0
-0.7
0.170
0.5
0.194
1.30
-0.10
-0.8
0.212
0.6
0.317
1.50
-0.80
-0.9
0.258
0.7
0.503
- 1.0
0.307
0.8
0.810
-1.2
0.412
0.84
1.00
- 1.4
0.525
0.90
1.40
-1.6
0.644
0.95
2.05
- 1.8
0.770
0.98
2.93
- 2.0
0.90
1.00
∞
-3.0
1.61
-1 has the same shape as that of the trajectory of m(t) = +1 ex-
cept that it is inverted.
When m(t) = 0, the phase plane trajectory is reduced to a simple
straight line described by
C - Co =
-(v — Vo)
(12-32)
Equation (12-31) is actually the equation of the phase plane tra-
jectory for a second-order relay-type system with continuous-data as
well as with sampled-data, since up to this point no mention is made
of the fact that the derivation of Eq. (12-31) is based on sampled-
data only. As is apparent, Eq. (12-31) is valid as long as m(to) is
constant or zero. The difference between the phase plane trajectory
of a sampled-data system and that of a continuous-data system ap-
pears to be in the switching time of the relay. For a continuous-

448
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
data system, the switching of the relay depends strictly on the
magnitude of the actuating signal e(t). But for a sampled-data sys-
tem, since e*(t) is a discrete function of time, the switching not only
depends on the magnitude of e*(t) or e(t) at the sampling instants
but can occur only at the sampling instants. The construction of
the entire phase-plane trajectory of a relay-type system with sampled
data may appear to be difficult, since time does not appear ex-
plicitly on the phase plane trajectory. Fortunately, a set of switch-
ing lines can be derived in the phase plane; the intersections of
the phase plane trajectory and the switching lines indicate the pos-
sibility of relay switchings. The details are described as follows:
-
=
For a sampled-data system, we let t to T, and the state
transition takes place from Cn to Cn+1 and vn to Un+1, respectively,
where cn denotes the value of c(t) at t = nT and vn denotes the
value of v(t) at t = nT. Cn+1 and vn+1 are the values of c(t) and
v(t) at t = (n + 1)T, respectively. Substituting these quantities into
Eq. (12-31) yields.
Cn+1 − Cn = − (Vn+! — Vn) — M₂ ln (Mn — Un+1
-
mn
Mn
-
Vn
(12-33)
where mn denotes the fact that m(t) can change values at the
sampling instants only. Since the trajectory in any sampling interval
starts at cn, Un and ends at Cn+1, Un+1 in the phase plane, given ca, Un,
we must determine exactly where the point Cn+1, Un+1 lies on the
trajectory. The time for the representing point on the trajectory to
travel from (cn, Un) to (Cn+1, Un+1) is equal to one sampling period
T. The relationship between Cn, Un and Cn+1, Un+1 can be obtained
from Eq. (12-28); that is
Cntton = cntont mặt
(12-34)
Equation (12-34) gives the sum of the coordinates of the switching
points as a function of the initial conditions (Cn, vn), the relay
switching function, and the sampling period T. In general, m, and
Tare known quantities, so that for given cn and vn, the correspond-
ing values of Cn+1+n+1 are determined from Eq. (12-34). How-
ever, to solve for C+ and vn+1, another independent relation is
desired. Since Cn+1, Un+1 in Eq. (12-34) must also lie on the phase
plane trajectory defined by Eq. (12-33), the exact location of the
point (C+1, V+1) in the phase plane is determined from the intersec-
tion of the line described by Eq. (12-34) and the phase plane tra-
jectory passing through (cn, vn).
=
Let us assume that c and v are such that their sum is A. Hence
the point (Cn, vn) lies on the line cn + Un A in the phase plane.
The point (C+1, Un+1) is found on the line which is described by

Sec. 12.3
449
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS

or
00
or
Slope = -1
Switching lines
Mn+1= +1
m=+1
(Cov₂)`
λ(C₂+2+n+2)
+(C₂+11 Vn+1)
Mn
(C₂+1, Vn+1).
TT
C+V=A+2T
TTT
Co+v=A-3T C₂+v=A-T C₂+ v₂ = A + T
C+v=A-2T C₂+v₁₂ = A
Fig. 12-12 Determination of Cn+1, n+1, using the equation
Cn+1+On+1 = Cn + Un + mnT and the phase plane trajectory.
Cn+1 + Un+1 = AT for
Mn = +1
Cn+1+Un+1 =
A
-
T for
mn = 1
Cn+1 + Un+1 =
A
for
mn =
0
(12-35)
(12-36)
(12-37)
=
=
By referring to Fig. 12-12 and assuming that at t = nT, we can
describe the state of the system by the point (Cn, vn) in the phase
plane, a set of straight lines with slopes equal to -1 and equations
of Cn + Un = A, Cn + Un A+T, Cn + Un A+ 2T, . . . Cn + Vn = A
-T, Cn + Un = A 2T, . . ., are drawn in the phase plane. The line
of cn + vn = mA actually passes through the point (cn, vn). Now let
us determine the switching points (Cn+1, Un+1) when mn takes on
values of +1, -1, and 0. When m+1, the operating point in
the phase plane will move from (cn, vn) along one of the m₂ = +1
trajectories shown in Fig. 12-11 until it reaches a point where the
mn+1 trajectory intersects the line cn + V = A + T; this inter-
section gives the point (Cn+1, Un+1). At this time t = (n + 1)T. If
mn+1 is again equal to +1, the operating point continues to move.
on the same trajectory until it reaches the line cn + Un = A + 2T,
and the intersection point gives (Cn+2, Un+2). However, at t = (n +
1)T, if Mn+1 = -1, the operating point will move from (Cn+1, Un+1)
along a m₁ = -1 trajectory until it reaches the cn + Un A line
and the intersecting point is (Cn+2, Un+2). If originally at t = nT, mn
mn
Vn
=
:

450
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
=
O, indicating that the relay has a dead zone, the switching line
given by Eq. (12-34) becomes
mn
Cn+1 + Un+1 = Cn + Vn
=
(12-38)
which is of a form identical to that of the phase plane trajectory
when m₂ = 0 (Eq. 12-32). Therefore, when ma = 0, the switching lines
and the phase plane trajectories are identical and are straight lines
with slope of -1. In Fig. 12-12 when m₂ = 0, the operating point
will move from (Cn, vn) along the line cn + Un A. However, since
time does not appear explicitly on the phase plane trajectory, the
location of the (Cn+1, Un+1) point on the cn + Un A line is uncer-
tain. To find the switching point, we must turn to Eq. (12-27).
Substituting mn = 0 into Eq. (12-27) yields
Un+1 = e "Un
Vn =
=
(12-39)
and since T is known, given Un, Un+1 is readily determined from Eq.
(12-39). The use of the phase plane method for determining the be-
havior of relay-type sampled-data control systems is illustrated by
the following examples.
Example 12-2
=
For the relay-type sampled-data control system of Fig. 12-1, let G,(s)
= 1/s(s+ 1) and assuming that the relay is ideal. The sampling period is
one second. Plot the phase plane diagram of the system for r(t) = 1.0 with
Co= 0,0 = 0.

m₂+1m=-1-
(C₁, V₁)
(C2, V2)
(C6, V6)
+1
Limit cycle
2
(C3, V3)
(C7, V7)
(Cava)
(co, Vo)
+1
Switching
lines
O
T
C₂+v=-T
co+10=0
C₂+v=T C+₁₂ = 27
R=1.0
Fig. 12-13 Phase plane diagram of the relay-type sampled-data
system in Example 12-2.

Sec. 12.3
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 451
=
The first step in the construction of the phase plane diagram involves the
drawing of the set of switching lines as shown in Fig. 12-13. The reference
switching line, which is described by the equation co+v 0, has a slope of
-1, and passes through the origin in the phase plane. All other switching
lines have the same slope and are spaced at a horizontal distance of integral
multiples of T from the co + % = 0 line. At t = 0, the error signal is +1;
hence m。 = +1. The operating point will move from the origin along one of
the +1.0 trajectories shown in Fig. 12-11 until the trajectory intersects the
switching line cn + Vn = T and the intersection determines the (c1, v₁) point.
Since c₁ is less than one, e, is positive, and m₁ = +1. The operating point
will continue to move along the same trajectory until it intersects the next
switching line cn + vn = 2T and the intersection point gives (c₂, v₂). Now
C₂ is greater than the magnitude of the reference input; hence e, is negative,
and m₂
1. The operating point must now be switched to and must move
along the -1 trajectory that passes through the (c₂, v₂) point until the trajec-
tory intersects the line c + Vn T and the point of intersection corresponds
to (C3, v3). As is apparent, c3 is still greater than unity; therefore, m3 = −1
and the operating point will continue to move along the -1 trajectory until
it intersects the switching line în + vn 0, and at the intersection m₁ = +1
the operating point is switched to a +1 trajectory. From Fig. 12-13 we can
see that as the above-mentioned switching process continues, the system will
eventually become unstable and exhibit a limit cycle. The period of the limit
cycle shown in Fig. 12-13 is 4 seconds, and the magnitude of the limit cycle
is approximately 0.85. The output response and the relay switching function
m(t) of the system are shown in Fig. 12-14.
=
=
m(1) O
-11
1.5-
c(1)
1.아
​0.5-
ми
2T
47 67
87 IOT 127 147 167 187
Fig. 12-14 Step response of the relay-type sampled-data system
in Example 12-2.
Example 12-3
For a nonlinear system, the period of oscillation of the output response
usually depends on the choice of the initial conditions. Figure 12-15 shows
that by choosing different initial conditions, the unit step response of the
system in the preceding example can have oscillations with periods of 2 sec.
(T. = 2T), 4 sec. (T, = 4T), and 6 sec. (T, = 6T).

452
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS

(co, vo)
t=0
t=T
1.0
+1
t=10T
t=6T
+1
-1
Limit cycle
period = 4 sec
t=9Tt=5T
t=8T
t=4T
2
3
t=2T
t=7T
-1
C₂+v=A+T
+1=3T
C+v=A-2T C₁₂+v₁₂ =A-T C₂+V₂ =A
(a)

t=8T
1=7T
+1
Limit cycle
period =
6 sec
t=2T
+1
+1
t=T
t=6T-
-1
+1
+1
-0.5 0
0.5
1.5
Co
-1
2.5
+1 Co, Vot=2T
1=3T
-1
=4T
1=5T
-1
Limit cycle
C+v=A+2T
period 2 sec
C₂+v=A+T
C₂+v=A-T
C₂+v=A
(b)
Fig. 12-15 (a) Phase plane diagram of system in Example 12-3;
Co= 0.8, 1.2 (b) Phase plane diagram of the relay-type
sampled-data system in Example 12-3; co= 0.5, vo= 0; co= 0.92,
Vo = -0.42.
Example 12-4
In this example we shall construct the phase plane diagram of the second-
order relay-type sampled-data system when the relay has a dead zone. The
trajectory in the phase plane, when the relay switches inside the dead zone,
has been shown to be a straight line of slope 1. Let us assume that the
dead zone D is equal to 0.1; r(t) = 0, T = 1 sec., and the initial conditions
of the system are co
-0.4 and vo 1.2. Notice that these conditions are
=
-

Sec. 12.3
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 453

(co, vo)
t=6T-
+1
1=5T
m6=0
t=T
t=7T-T
O
--
2-
+1
t=2T
Limit cycle
period = 5 sec
-1
1=3T
t=4T
-1
C₂+v=A+T
Cn+v=A
D=0.1
C₂+v=A=T
-D=0.1
R=0
Fig. 12-16 Phase plane diagram of relay-type sampled-data
system with dead zone D = 0.1; co
=
=
=
-0.4, vo
= 1.2.
identical to those of the system whose response is obtained by the state
transition method and is shown in Fig. 12-5b. One of the purposes of this
example is to check the previous results by use of the phase plane method.
As shown in Fig. 12-16, the set of switching lines are drawn in the phase
plane with the reference line cn + Un A passing through the initial condition
point (-0.4, 1.2). At t = 0, the operating point begins to move along the
+1 trajectory that corresponds to > 1, until it intersects the c₂+vn =
AT switching line. Then, at t T, since e < 0, the operating point is
shown moving along the -1 trajectory for these sampling periods. At t = 4T
the error becomes positive, and the operating point is switched on to the +1
trajectory. After two sampling periods at t = 6T, the intersection of the +1
trajectory and the cn + Un A line is found inside the dead zone and the
operating point will move along this switching line, since it is also the
trajectory when m, 0. The location of the next switching point is found
by use of Eq. (12-39). Since at t = 6T, ve 0.72 is read from the phase
plane diagram, Eq. (12-39) gives
=
=
=
V7=e¹ x 0.72 = 0.265
(12-40)
Hence the point which corresponds to t = 7T is found on the line cn + vn = A.
Figure 12-16 shows that the phase plane trajectory finally exhibits a limit
cycle with a period of 5 sec. (T = 5T). The amplitude of oscillation is
approximately 1.12, peak-to-peak.
Note that the system response indicated by the phase plane diagram of
Fig. 12-16 cheks quite closely with the response of Fig. 12-5b, which is
obtained by use of the state transition method. The phase plane method gives
the exact continuous response at all times, whereas the difference equation

454 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
method, being an analytical method, produces the response only at the
sampling instances, and the actual response in between sampling instants
must be estimated from the discrete data. This fact explains why the estimated
response of Fig. 12-5b shows an amplitude of oscillation of only 0.52 peak-
to-peak, whereas the actual amplitude is 0.56.
The reader may find it interesting and instructive to check the responses
shown in Figs. 12-4 and 12-5a and c using the phase plane method in the
manner described above.
A stabilizing effect may be achieved if the relay is allowed to have a
dead zone. This fact has been shown previously in Sec. 12.2 by the state
transition approach, and two stable responses of the relay-type sampled-data
system are shown in Fig. 12-6 when the relay dead zone is 0.6. To illustrate
the stabilizing effect of the dead zone, the phase plane diagrams of the two
responses of Fig. 12-6 are plotted in Fig. 12-17.

m5=0
t=5T
(co, vo)
(co.vo)
+1
84
-1
O
ī
1
-1 2
t=4T
m3=0
t=T
t=T
t=2T
t=3T
D=0.6 D=0.6
Fig. 12-17 Phase plane diagram of relay-type sampled-data system
with dead zone D = 0.6; co = 1.5, vo = 0.5; co= 0.6, vo
=
= 0.4.
Several interesting points are observed from the phase plane diagram of
Fig. 12-17. For the initial conditions assumed and with r(t) = 0, the only
stable steady-state value of c(t) for T = 1 sec. is zero because operating point
of the system at the sampling instants must lie on one of the switching lines,
and in this case the only one of these lines which intersects the horizontal
(v0) axis inside the dead zone is the line cn + vn A, and the point of
intersection is at the origin in the phase plane. Also, for the initial conditions
of Co
1.5 and v。 = 0.5 with r(t) = 0, the system is stable only if the point
a on the phase plane trajectory lies inside the dead zone. Therefore, the
width of the dead zone required for the system to be stable under the specified
initial and input conditions can be determined from Fig. 12-17. In a similar
fashion, the width of the dead zone required for stability when the system
is subjected to a step input of any magnitude can be determined.
=

Sec. 12.3
455
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Phase Plane Diagrams of Systems With Sinusoidal Inputs
The phase plane method can also be applied to a second-order
relay-type system which has a sine wave input signal. In fact, the
method described in the following paragraphs can be used to approx-
imate the response of a continuous-data system with relay and a
sine wave input. In this case the sampler and the hold circuit of
the system in Fig. 12-1 become fictitious elements.
When analyzing relay-type sampled-data systems with sinusoidal
inputs, the relationship between the signal frequency and the samp-
ling frequency is of great importance. In general, the ratio of the
signal frequency to the sampling frequency can be one of the fol-
lowing: (1) an integer, (2) a rational number, and (3) an irrational
number. The phase plane analysis is simplest when the frequency
ratio is an integer. But the phase plane method can also be applied
if the frequency ratio is a rational number or an irrational number.
The method is best illustrated by a numerical example.
Example 12-5
Consider the relay-type sampled-data system shown in Fig. 12-1. The
sampling period is 1.0 sec., G(s) = 1/s(s + 1), and the relay characteristic is
described by Eq. (12-5). The initial conditions are c₁ = 0, and
Vo 0. A
sinusoidal input signal
r(t): = sin wt
=
(12-41)
where @ = π/2 rad. is applied to the system. The signal frequency to sampling
frequency ratio is two. For the sampling frequency chosen, the input at the
sampling instants, r(nT) has the sequence, 0, +1, 0, −1, 0, +1, 0, −1, . . ..
Since the switching of the relay depends essentially on the error signal at
the sampling instants e(nT), where
=
-
=
e(nT) = r(nT) — c(nT)
-
(12-42)
or en rn C for short, the phase plane diagram of the sinusoidally excited
system can be constructed in the usual manner simply by considering the
sequential variation of r at the sampling instants. Since rn can take on only
three values, +1, 0, and -1 in this system, in the phase plane of Fig. 12-18
three dead zones are located with centers at c = +1, 0, and 1. For zero initial
conditions and T 1.0 sec., the switching lines are drawn in the usual manner.
Now, at t = 0, and =
Το 0, the system sees a zero input; hence there is no
response. At t = T, r₁
+1, and m₁ = +1, the operating point of the system
will move along the +1 trajectory that passes through the origin in the phase
plane. At the intersection of the +1 trajectory and the c + Vn A+ T line,
t = 2T, and also r½ 0. The dead zone is effectively centered at the origin
at this instant, and since the operating point is outside the dead zone, and
e is negative the operating point is switched to a -1 trajectory. When
t = 3T, r3 =
-1. The dead zone is located at c = -1, and c, is negative;
hence the operating point continues to stay on the 1 trajectory until t = 4T.
=
=
----
=

456 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12

Dead zone r=-1
Dead zone r=0
Dead zone
= +1
6T
2
=0
2T
-O.I
+1
O.I
5 +1
5T
-0.5
-0.1 O
0.1
0.5
Limit cycle
(period = 4T)
4T
+1
78=0
-1
(a)
r₁ = -1
3-1
37
C₂+ V₂ = T
r(1)
-1F
0.5ㅏ
​3
15
AAAAAA
1 2
5 6
810
9
c(t)
1214
13
4 5
이
​1 2 3
89
6 7
10 11
-0.5
12 13
14 15
A
Period 4 sec
=
(b)
Fig. 12-18 Phase plane diagram and input and output signals of
the relay-type sampled-data system in Example 12-5.

Sec. 12.3
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 457
Dead zone r=-1
Dead zone r=0

Av
Dead zone - +1
10-0
+1
0.4
0.4
46
IOT
-0.4 0.4
97
272-0
+1
6T
9 +1
6-0
m2=0
73=-1
37
m=0
71|
77=-1
= +1
-1.4
1=T
-0.6
0.4
0.6
1.4
+1
+1
-1
r(1)
Limit
cycle
(period
= 8 sec)
8T
5 +1
57
-1
4=0
C₁₂+v=T
4T
Cn+v=-T
(a)
C+v=0
-1
AAAAAA
.c(1)
0.5
-0.5
1 2 3 4 5
6
9
7 8
10 11 12 13
14 15
17
16
18 19
Period
= 8 sec
(b)
D = 0.4
Fig. 12-19 Phase data diagram and input and output signals of
the relay-type sampled-data system in Example 12-5.

458
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
=
=
-T line. With r₁ =
At t = 4T, the -1 trajectory intersects the cn + Un
= 0,
the operating point of the system at
= 4T lies outside of the dead zone
centered at the origin, and the operation point is switched to a +1 trajectory.
As this process is carried on, Fig. 12-18a shows that the phase plane diagram
exhibits a limit cycle after the initial transient. The period of the oscillation
is equal to the period of the input signal (4 sec). The input signal, input
sequence, and the output signal of the system are plotted in Fig. 12-18b.
Fig. 12-19 gives the phase plane diagram and the output response of the
same system under the same input and initial conditions, but with the dead
zone increased to 0.4. The output response is again a sustained oscillation
with period equal to twice the period of the input sinusoid.
The preceding example has demonstrated that the phase plane
method can be applied to a relay-type sampled-data system with a
sinusoidal input in a straightforward manner. The main essence in
the method is the identification of the magnitudes of the input
sequence r which must be taken into account when computing
switching at the sampling instants. Clearly the method can also be
applied to cases where the signal frequency to sampling frequency
ratio is a rational number or an irrational number. However, in the
case of the irrational ratio of frequenies, the input sequence does
not vary periodically, and therefore, the output response is not
periodic. Normally, an infinite amount of time would be needed to
carry out the entire output response.
As is clear, the method described above is not limited to only
sampled-data systems with sinusoidal inputs. The method can be ap-
plied to a relay-type sampled-data system with almost any input as
long as the input sequency r is defined at the outset of the analysis.
For a ramp input, the phase plane analysis should be conducted in
the e versus e' plane, since the output response c would increase
with time.
12.4 THE INCREMENTAL PHASE PLANE METHOD+
Difference Equations
In the preceding section, the idea of the conventional phase plane
has been applied to the analysis of nonlinear sampled-data system.
The conventional phase plane method consists essentially of writing
↑ J. A. Aseltine, "Nonlinear Sampled-Data System Analysis by the Incremental Phase
Plane Method," Proc. of the International Federation of Automatic Control, Moscow,
1960. J. A. Aseltine, R. A. Nesbit, "The Incremental Phase Plane for Nonlinear Sampled-
Data Systems," I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-5, August 1960, pp.
159-165.

Sec. 12.4
459
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
the second-order differential equation of a system as a pair of first
order equations involving two dependent variables (usually one of
the variables is the derivative of the other) and then plotting the
paths generated in the phase plane by the two variables with time.
as a parameter.
We have found that difference equations bear the same relation
to sample-data systems as ordinary differential equations do to con-
tinuous-data equations. This implies that an 'incremental phase
plane" may be defined as to consist of the plot of the first difference
of a variable versus the variable itself.
--►C(2)
E(s) E*(s)
↑ E(2)
G(s)
-C(s)
Fig. 12-20 Linear open-loop sampled-data system.
Before entering the discussions of the incremental phase plane,
let us define the "differences" of a difference equation. Consider the
linear open-loop sampled-data system shown in Fig. 12-20. The z-
transform of the output signal is written.
∞
C(z) = Σ c(nT)z¯
n=0
(12-43)
The magnitudes of c(t) at the sampling instants are given by c(0),
c(T), c(2T), c(3T), . c(nT), . . . .. The sequence of the first dif-
ference is given by
....
Aco = c(T) = c(0)
Ac₁ = c(2T) - c(T)
Δε
-
Ac₂ = c(3T) c(2T)
Acn-1 = c(nT) - c(n − 1)T
Acn= c(n + 1)T - c(nT)
(12-44)
where the symbol "A" can be regarded as a difference operator.
Likewise, the differences of the sequence of first differences of Eq.
(12-44) are called the second differences of the sequence c(nT). Thus
the sequence of second difference of the sequence c(nT) is A²co, A²c₁,
A²C 2,.
where
A²Cn,
A²cn = Acn+1 - Acn
(12-45)
and from the definition of the first difference, the last equation is
written as
-
▲²cn = c(n + 2) T − 2c(n + 1)T + c(nT)
(12-46)

460 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
In general, the k-th difference of the sequence c(nT) can be defined
as
A*Cn = A*-Cn+1 - A-1 Cn
(12-47)
Now we shall see how a difference equation is written from a z-
transform equation. From the definition of the z-transformation and
the real translation theorem given by Eq. (4-69), the following in-
verse z-transforms are written:
and
00
3-'[E(x)] = Σe(nT)8(t − nT)
00
n2=0
-
-
Z¯'[x™E(x)] = Σe(nT + mT)8(t − nT)
n=0
m-1
- -
Σ e(kT)d(t − kT + mT)
k=0
where m is a positive integer and n = 0, 1, 2, ....
(12-48)
(12-49)
If we are interested in only the impulse sequence for t greater than
0, then the last term on the right side of Eq. (12-49) vanishes; Eq.
(12-49) becomes
-
Z¯'[x™E(x)] = Σe(nT + mT)8(t − nT)
72=0
(12-50)
Equation (12-50) generally leads to the formulation of difference
equations from z-transform equations. As an illustration, consider
that the open-loop transfer function of the sampled-data system
shown in Fig. 12-20 is given by
=
C(z) a, z" + ar-12″-1 +
E(z) bqz? + bq-12-1+
Equation (12-51) can be written as
•
+ ao
•
+ bo
(bqz + bq-12-¹ + ... + bo)C(z) = (a,z' + Ar-12″-1
+
+ ao)E(z)
(12-51)
(12-52)
If we take the inverse z-transform term by term and use the rela-
tion given by Eq. (12-50), Eq. (12-52) becomes
∞
ba
n=0
00
c[(n + q)T]d(t − nT) + bq-1 Σ c[(n + q − 1)T]d(t − nT)
00
+ . . . + b, Σ c(nT)d(t
∞
n=0
7=0
nT) = a, Σ e[(n + r)T]d(t − nT)
n=0
+ ar-1 Σe[(n + r− 1)T]8(t − nT) + . . .
∞
n=0
-
+ ao Σe(nT) 8(t − nT)
72=0
−
(12-53)
Equating the coefficients of the impulses at the same sampling in-
stants yields

Sec. 12.4
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 461
+ +
bạc[(n +q)T] + ba-c[(n + q−1)T]+...+bc(nT)
= a,e[(n + r)T] + a,-,e[(n + r− 1)T] + . . . + a。e(nT)
(12-54)
Equation (12-54) is known as the difference-equation description of
the sampled-data shown in Fig. 12-20. This is analogous to the dif-
ferental-equation representation of a continuous-data system.
In view of the difference sequence defined previously, the difference
equation of Eq. (12-54) can also be written in terms of the dif-
ferences Acn (n, k = 0, 1, 2, . . .).
The following example illustrates the formulation of the dif-
ference equation of a sampled-data system.
Example 12-6
Assume that the transfer function of the system in Fig. 12-20 is given by
G(s) = K/s²
The z-transfer function of the system is (T = 1 sec)
(12-55)
C(z)
E(z)
=
= G(z) =
=
-
Κα
(≈ − 1)²
If we cross-multiply, Eq. (12-56) becomes
(x² - 2x + 1)C(z) = KzE(z)
(12-56)
(12-57)
Using the relationship between Eqs. (12-52) and (12-54), the difference
equation of the system is written directly from Eq. (12-57)
c[(n + 2)T] − 2c[(n + 1)T] + c(nT) = Ke[(n + 1)T]
-
or, in simplified notations,
Since Cn+2
-
be written as
Cn+2
――
2cn+1 + Cn
=
Ken+1
(12-58)
(12-59)
2n+1+Cn is the second difference Acn of cn, Eq. (12-59) can
A2 Cn
=
Ken+1
(12-60)
The Incremental Phase Plane (The A-plane)
The incremental phase plane, or the A-plane, is defined as a plane
which has the first difference of a variable as ordinate and the varia-
ble itself as abscissa. If a second-order sampled-data system is char-
acterized by the dependent variable c(t), the incremental phase
plane diagram of the system is a plot of the first difference Ac₂ of
the sequence c(nT) as a function of cn. Each solution point in the
A-plane represents a value of cn and the first difference Ac₁ for n =
0, 1, 2, 3, . . .. Hence the trajectory in the A-plane is a curve that
passes through all the solution points (cn, Acn) for n = 0, 1, 2, 3, . .
. . ..
However, we should point out that the difference equation approach

462 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
gives solutions only at the sampling instants. Therefore, although
the trajectory of the A-plane is a continuous curve, only discrete
points on the trajectory that correspond to sampling instants are
significant.
Let us use the relay-type sampled-data system of Example 12-1
to illustrate the construction of the A-plane trajectory. If assump-
tion is made that the relay contacts are able to open and close in-
stantaneously with zero duration, the positions of the relay and the
hold device of the system can be interchanged without affecting the
analytical results of the system. The equivalent system, with the
relay and the hold device transposed, is shown in Fig. 12–21.
Zero-order
hold
Ideal
relay
Controlled
process
r(t) e(t)
x(t)
c(t)
Gn(s)
1
s(s+1)
T=1 sec
G(s)=1/s(s+ 1)
Fig. 12-21 Second-order relay-type sampled-data system.
The z-transform of the system output c(t) is written as a func-
tion of the relay output X(z); hence
C(z)
=
0.264 +0.368z
X(z)
-
z − 1)(≈ − 0.368)
(12-61)
Cross-multiplying and rearranging terms, we see that Eq. (12-61)
becomes
-
(z² 1.3682 +0.368) C(z) = (0.264 +0.368z) X(z) (12-62)
The difference equation is determined directly from Eq. (12–62).
Cn+21.368cn+1 +0.368cn= 0.264.xn+ 0.368.xn+1
In terms of the differences, Eq. (12-63) is written as
A cn +0.632 Acn= 0.264xn + 0.368xn+1
(12-63)
(12-64)
For the system under consideration, since x and xn+1 can take on
values of only +1 and -1, the right-hand side of Eq. (12–64) is
always a constant. Hence, Eq. (12-64) can be expressed as
where
A'cn +0.632 Acn
= K
K = 0.264.xn + 0.363xn+1
(12-65)
(12-66)
65) is
K
Cn =
K
0.32 - In|1 - 0632 Ac. |- Ac.] + A
It will be shown in the following that the solution of Eq. (12-
1
Асп
(12-67)

Sec. 12.4
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 463
where A is an arbitrary constant. To prove that Eq. (12-67) is a
solution of Eq. (12-65), we take the first difference of both sides of
Eq. (12-67):
10.632
K
Асп = Δ
AK-In|1 -0.632 Ac.|]}
1
0.632
A2cn
(12-68)
=
-
(12-69)
and since
Eq. (12-68) becomes
K
A(ln cn) In Cn+1 In cn
Acn= 0.632 [In/1-0.632
1
-0.632 Ac... -In |1 -0.632 Ac.] -0.6324°c.
K
K
Substituting the relation.
into Eq. (12-70) yields
ACn+1 = A'Cn + Acn
Cn =
(12-70)
(12-71)
-
0.632
K₂ In|1
0.632
K
(A²Cn + Acn) -
Ac₂) | – In|1 –
0.632
K
Асп
1 A2cn
(12-72)
0.632
After rearranging terms, Eq. (12-72) reads
0.632
1
(A²Cn + Acn)
K
A'cn'+0.632Ac₁ = -Kln
1
0.632 Acn
(12-73)
K
Substituting Eq. (12-65) into Eq. (12-73) for K, we very easily obtain
A'cn + 0.632 Acn= A'cn + 0.632Acn
(12-74)
Therefore, Eq. (12-67) is proved to be a solution of Eq. (12-65).
When the system is subjected to a unit step input, r(t) = 1.0.
The value of K at any sampling instant t = nT will depend upon
the magnitudes of cn and C+1. Determining the value of cn+1 at t =
nT is not a problem, since Cn+1 is given by
Cn+1 = ACn + Cn
(12-75)
Once the trajectory is given, the increment in abscissa to C₂+1 may
be determined by adding the ordinated Acn to the abscissa cn at
t = nT.
For the relay system given, the following values of the relay
output are possible at t = nT:
Xn = +1
Cn <1
Хп
= -1
Cn > 1
(12-76)

464 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
Similarly, at t = (n + 1)T,
Xn+1 = +1
Cn+1 <1
Xn+1 = -1
Cn+1 > 1
(12-77)
Substitution of Eqs. (12-76) and (12-77) into the expression of Eq.
(12-66) yields the following possible values of K and combination
of xn and xn+1:
In
Xn+1
K(= 0.264x + 0.368xn+1)
Сп
Ca+1
+1
+1
0.632
< 1
<1
+1
- 1
-0.104
< 1
> 1
- 1
+1
0.104
> 1
<1
-1
- 1
-0.632
> 1
> 1
As we see, K can have only four possible values: 0.632, −0.632,
0.104, and -0.104. In Fig. 12-22, the incremental phase plane
trajectories described by Eq. (12-67) are plotted for these four
Асп
2.5
2.0
1.5
K=0.632
-1.0
0.5
Сп
-2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 O
0.5
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
3
-0.5
-1.0
K = -0.632
--1.5
- -2.0
--2.5
-3.0
(a)
Fig. 12-22 (a) ▲-plane trajectory for Acn + 0.632▲cn = K;
K = +0.632 and K = -0.632.

Sec. 12.4
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 465
possible values of K with A = 0. Note that the trajectory for a
negative value of K may be obtained by rotating the corresponding
positive K trajectory through 180 deg. about the origin. For any
initial condition (co, Aco) that does not lie on the trajectories of
Fig. 12-22, the particular trajectory is simply shifted horizontally so
that it goes through the initial point (co, Aco). Since A is an ar-
bitrary constant in Eq. (12-67), shifting any one of the trajectories
of Fig. 12-22 horizontally through any distance still satisfies the
solution equation.
Before entering the construction of the over-all A-plane diagram
of the system, the technique of finding the successive solution
(operating) points along the A-plane trajectory needs further ex-
planations. Let us assume that the system has the initial conditions
(co, Aco) shown in Fig. 12-23a. Before determining the location of
the next point (c₁, Ac₁) in the A-plane, we must find out which one
of the four trajectories in Fig. 12-22 is in effect during the time
Асп
2.5
2.0
1.5
F1.0
-2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5
V- ----
K=-0.104
-0.5 K=0.104
Сп
O 0.5 1.0 1.5
2.0 2.5 3
-0.5
F-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
-3.0
(b)
Fig. 12-22 (b) A-plane trajectory for Acn + 0.632Acn = K;
K = +0.104 and K: = -0.104.

466 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
Асп
-1.0
b(c₂, Ac₂)
- 1.0
kon A Col
K=0.632
(c₁, Ac₁)
- 1.0
(ci, Ac₁)
K=-0.104
ACO
a(c₂, Ac₂)
-AC₁
Cn
2.0
Aco
(a)
Асп
1.아
​1.0
K=0.632
Сп
O
1.0
2.0
(b)
Fig. 12-23 Location of operating points of the A-plane trajectory.
interval between 0 and T. Since the value of K depends upon c₁ as
well as co, a knowledge of the initial point (co, Aco) alone is insuf-
ficient to determine the trajectory. The value of c₁ is easily found
from
C1 =
Дсо + со
(12-78)
Assuming that co is less than unity and that c₁ determined from Eq.
(12-78) is also less than unity, the K = 0.632 trajectory should be
drawn through the point (co, Aco). The point (c₁, Ac₁) is easily found
on the trajectory by adding Aco to the abscissa co as shown in Fig.
12-23a. The value of c₂ can be found in a similar manner. Now the
effective trajectory during the time intervals T and 2T is deter
mined by the values of c, and c₂. If c₂ is still less than unity, the

Sec. 12.4
467
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
=
operating point at t = 2T is still found on the K = 0.632 trajectory,
since c<1. However, if c> 1, then the K -0.104 trajectory
>1,
must be drawn passing through the (c₁, Ac₁) point; and the next
point (c2, Ac₂) is found on this trajectory. Due to the multiple-valued
property of the trajectory (K = −0.104), both point a and point
b satisfy the relationship
C₂ = Ac₁ + C₁
(12-79)
This ambiguity is removed by recognizing the fact that time pro-
gresses in the direction of the arrows along the trajectory; thus a
change of the operating point in either direction from the point
(c₁, Ac₁) along the trajectory must cause a change in the correspond-
ing direction in the point (C2, Ac₂). As shown in Fig. 12-23a, if the
operating point is shifted in the forward direction along the trajec-
tory to (ci, Ací), the point at a moves in the same direction to a',
whereas the point at b moves in the opposite direction to b'.
Therefore, a is the correct location for (c2, Ac₂). It can be shown
that for the K = +0.104 and the K = -0.104 trajectories, whenever
an ambiguity arises, such as between points a and b in Fig. 12-23a,
the nearest point reached along the trajectory is the correct one.
In Fig. 12-23b, the K = +0.632 trajectory is shown plotted through
an initial condition point (co, Aco). With the same reasoning used
above, we see that the point b rather than point a is the correct
point for the next switching point (c1, Ac₁). In general, we can state
that for the K = +0.632 or the K = -0.632 trajectories, the far-
thest point reached along the trajectory is the correct switching
point.
To illustrate the construction of the complete A-plane diagram
for the system, let us assume the initial conditions c(0) = 0 and
c'(0) = 0. For a unit-step function input r(t) = 1.0 and x(0) = 1.0,
the system output during the time interval 0<t<T is given by
Hence
and
-
c(t) = t (1-e)
c(T) = c₁ = e¹ = 0.368
Aco C1-
-
Co= 0.368
(12-80)
(12-81)
(12-82)
Following the procedure described above, the A-plane trajectory of
the relay-type sampled-data system is drawn in Fig. 12-24. A limit
cycle of period equal to 4 sec. and centered at c = 1.0 results.
An interesting comparison can be made of the results of the A-
plane trajectory and the response shown in Fig. 12-14 and obtained
by use of the ordinary phase plane method. The system response
at the sampling instants c₂ indicated in Fig. 12-24 checks very close-
ly with the response at sampling instants in Fig. 12-14. However,

468
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Асп
+2.0
F1.0
t=T
K = 0.632
(Co 4C )(0.368
t = 5T
K = -0.104
t = 2T
- 1.0
ΟΙ
1.0
2.0
Сп
14T
K = 0.632
-K = -0.632
K = 0.104
t = 3T
--1.0
Fig. 12-24 Incremental phase plane (▲-plane) trajectory of relay-
type sampled-data control system. G(s) = 1/s(s + 1); T = 1 sec;
ideal relay.
the diagram in Fig. 12-24 does not carry any information on the
response between sampling instants.
Based on the foregoing analysis of the relay-type sampled-data
system, the incremental phase plane method would seem to have
hardly any advantage over the conventional phase plane method.
The construction of the conventional phase plane diagrams of relay-
type sampled-data systems simply relies on the use of simple fixed
templates of the +1 and -1 trajectories. The switching lines are
derived and are drawn in the phase plane, and the intersections of
the switching lines and the phase plane trajectories give the response
quantities at the sampling instants. Moreover, the conventional phase
plane method gives the response not only at the sampling instants,
but at all times. However, how the conventional phase plane method
can be extended to analyze sampled-data systems with nonlinearities
other than the relay type is not at all clear. On the other hand,
although the incremental phase plane method is more difficult to
use in analyzing relay-type systems, it can be used to analyze a varie-
ty of other nonlinearities. We shall illustrate this feature by con-
sidering a sampled-data system with saturation.
The block diagram of a sampled-data system with saturation is
shown in Fig. 12-25.
The equation for C(z) is written

Sec. 12.4
469
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
r(t)
e(t)
1+
-1+
*
x(1)
c(t)
G(s) = 1/2
Fig. 12-25 Sampled-data control system with saturation. T = 1.0
sec, r(t) = 1.0.
C(x)
2
=
Z
-
1)² X(2)
(12-83)
The difference equation of the open-loop system between X and C
is
A²Cn = Xn+1
(12-84)
For the saturation characteristic given and r(t) = 1.0, x(t) has the
following quantities at t = (n + 1)T:
Xn+1 = +1
Xn+1 =
Xn+1 =
1
-
-
-1
- Cn+1
Cn+10
0≤ Cn+12
Cn+12
Thus when Cn+1 ≤0 and Cn+1≥2, Eq. (12-84) reads
Acn = +1 = K
(12-85)
(12-86)
-2
-1
K=-1
Асп
-2
-1
Cn
1
2
K = +1
-2
Fig. 12-26 A-plane trajectories for Ac₁ = K.

470
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
and when 0 Cn+1 ≤2, Eq. (12-84) becomes
A cn + Acn + (cn − 1) = 0
(12-87)
We can show that the solution of Eq. (12-86) is
(Acn)2
K(2cn + Acn) = A
(12-88)
where K +1 or -1; and the solution of Eq. (12-87) is
-
(Acn)2 + Acn (Cn − 1) + (Cn − 1)² = A²
(12-89)
where A is an arbitrary constant.
The trajectories described by Eq. (12-88) are plotted in Fig. 12–
26 for K = +1 and -1. The trajectories are parabolas with axes
displaced 1/2 units from the cn axis. The K = -1 trajectory is the
same as the K = +1 trajectory rotated through an angle of 180
degrees. The trajectories for Eq. (12-89) are a family of ellipses
centered at c₂ = 1 and are rotated through an angle of +45 degrees.
(Fig. 12-27).
Cn
To construct the entire A-plane trajectory of the closed-loop
system, the same procedure described previously may be used. For
the initial condition of co= 0 and Ac。= 0.2, the A-plane trajectory
of the system with saturation is drawn in Fig. 12-28. The step re-
Асп
A=1.4
A = 1.2
A=1.0
A=0.8
A = 0.6
1.6
2.4
Сп
Fig. 12-27 A-plane trajectories for ▲²c₁ + Ac₁ + (Cn − 1) = 0.
+ To prove that Eqs. (12-88) and (12-89) are, respectively, the solutions of Eqs.
(12-86) and (12-87), simply take the first difference of both sides of Eqs. (12-88)
and (12-89) and solve for Acn

Sec. 12.5
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
471
Асп
+2.0
Ellipse
t=T
Saturation
region
1.0
-1.0
- 1.0
0.2 (co, co)
t=2T
Saturation
region
OL 1=5T 1.0
2.0
Сп
11=3T
-1.0
1=4T
Ellipse
-2.0
G(s) = 1/s² (no hold device), T = 1 sec,
r(t) = 1.0, co
=
= 0, co
= 0.2.
Fig. 12-28 A-plane trajectory of sampled-data system with satu-
ration.
sponse has a sustained oscillation in the steady-state. The period of
oscillation is 6 sec, and the amplitude of oscillation is 2.2 peak-to-
peak.
12.5 THE DESCRIBING FUNCTION METHOD
The describing function method introduced by Goldfarb and
Kochenburgert has been a powerful and popular tool in the analysis
and synthesis of nonlinear systems with continuous-data. The des-
cribing function enables one to study the steady-state sinusoidal re-
sponse of a nonlinear system of any finite order. The application of
the describing function method relies on the following assumptions
and considerations:
+ L. C. Goldfarb, "On Some Non-linear Phenomena in Regulatory Systems," Avto-
matika i Telemekhanika, 8, No. 5, 1947, pp. 349-83.
R. J. Kochenburger, "A Frequency Response Method for Analyzing and Syn-
thesizing Contactor Servomechanisms," Trans. A. I. E. E., 69, Part 1, 1950, pp. 270-284.

472 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
r(t)
e(t)
n
G(s)
c(t)
Nonlinear
Controlled
element
process
(linear)
Fig. 12-29 Nonlinear feedback control system with continuous-
data.
(1) The continuous-data system contains only one nonlinear ele-
ment. A typical form of the nonlinear system for describing func-
tion studies is shown in Fig. 12-29.
(2) The input to the nonlinear element n is assumed to be
sinusoidal. The output of n is generally not a sine wave, but never-
theless, it is a periodic function and can be represented by a Fourier
series. Only the fundamental component of the output of the non-
linear element is assumed to be significant. Actually, if the input to
n is considered to be sinusoidal, the output of n will contain com-
ponents at the fundamental frequency and in general at all higher
harmonic frequencies. Since the harmonics in the outputs of most
of the common types of nonlinearities encountered in servo systems
are often of smaller amplitudes than the amplitudes of the funda
mental components, most servo systems act as low-pass filters so that
the higher harmonics in the output of the nonlinear elements are
attenuated when compared to the fundamental component.
When the basic assumptions listed above are satisfied, the non-
linear element n can be represented by an equivalent transfer func-
tion called the "describing function," which is defined as the ratio
of the fundamental component of the output to the amplitude of
the input. Therefore,
Describing function N
=
Fundamental component of output from Fourier analysis
Amplitude of the sinusoidal input signal
(12-90)
Once the describing function of the nonlinear element of a given
system is determined, it can be used to study the stability of the
nonlinear system. If the nonlinear element is properly represented
by its describing function N, where N is generally a complex num-
ber and a function of the input signal amplitude and frequency, it
follows that the closed-loop transfer function of the system in Fig.
12-29 is
=
C(s) NG(s)
R(s) 1+ NG(s)
(12-91)

Sec. 12.5
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 473
The stability of the closed-loop nonlinear system depends upon the
zeros of the equation
1+ NG(s) = 0
(12-92)
Just as in the case of the linear system, if all the zeros of Eq.
(12-92) are located in the left-half of the s-plane, the system is
stable; if one or more zeros are found in the right-half of the s-
plane, the system is unstable. The roots of Eq. (12-92) may also be
interpreted as the condition when
G(s) = -1/N
(12-93)
Normally, the stability analysis can be carried out in either of the
following domains: (1) the Nyquist diagram, or (2) the gain-phase
plot. In the case of the Nyquist analysis, for instance, the system sta-
bility is investigated by plotting the G(s) and the -1/N loci in the
polar coordinates. The G(s) plot is the ordinary frequency locus of the
linear part of the system, but the -1/N locus can be considered to
be the locus of the critical point, which in linear theory is the (-1,
jo) point in the complex G-plane. When N is a function of only
the input signal magnitude E to the nonlinear element, the critical
points of -1/N form a locus which is a function of E. If N is a
function of both E and w, a family of loci must be constructed;
on each locus @ is constant, but E is a variable parameter.
The relative position of the G(s) locus and the -1/N plot in-
dicates the stability condition of the nonlinear system. When the
critical points of -1/N lie to the left of the G(s) locus or are not
enclosed by it (assuming that G(s) is itself a stable system func-
tion), the closed-loop system is said to be stable, since any distur-
bances which appear in the system will tend to die out. Converse-
ly, when any part of the -1/N locus lies to the right of the G(s)
locus and thus is enclosed by it, the implication is that any distur
bances which are characterized by the values of E corresponding to
the enclosed critical points will provide unstable operations. The
intersection of the G(s) and -1/N loci corresponds to the possibili-
ty of a periodic oscillation characterized by the value of E on the
-1/N locus and the value of on the G(s) locus. For the situation
in which the -1/N locus is a function of both E and w, periodic
oscillation is possible only if the values of w at the intersection are
identical on the two loci. The periodic solution described above may
be stable or unstable despite slight disturbances in amplitude E or
frequency from the equilibrium condition. If the equilibrium state
is a stable one, the amplitude of oscillation tends to return to its
original value following a disturbance. If the equilibrium is unstable,
the oscillation either increases or decreases in amplitude depending

474
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Linear
process
r(t)
e(t)
e (t)
Zero-order h(t)
hold
Relay
G(s)
c(1)
m(t)
Nonlinear element n
Fig. 12-30 Relay-type sampled-data control system.
upon the direction of the disturbance. The oscillation may increase
indefinitely or enter into some other equilibrium state.
The system shown in Fig. 12-30 demostrates the extension of
the describing function method to the study of nonlinear sampled-
data control systems. Early contributions on the study of relay-type
sampled-data systems by means of the describing function technique
have been made by Chowt and Russell. In these early investigations
the nonlinear element n is considered to include the sampling switch,
the zero-order hold, and the on-off relay. Thus the system configu-
ration of the sampled-data system is identical to that of the con-
tinuous-data system shown in Fig. 12-29. For a sinusoidal input
e(t) whose period is an integral multiple of the sampling period T,
the output of the nonlinear element n is a periodic rectangular
wave. Therefore, the conventional describing function technique or-
dinarily used for continuous-data systems can be applied directly.
The nonlinear sampled-data system is essentially treated as a non-
linear continuous-data system, since the sampler is absorbed by the
nonlinear element.
In this section a new describing function called the "discrete
describing function" is derived utilizing the z-transformation. In
this case the nonlinear element n in the sampled-data system is
considered to include only the on-off relay. The discrete describing
function method has the following advantages and features:
(1) The discrete describing function is natural for sampled-data
systems; it is analogous to the use of the conventional describing
function for continuous-data systems.
(2) The discrete describing function method can be applied to
systems with or without zero-order hold devices
(3) Systems with more than one synchronized sampler can be
analyzed.
† C. K. Chow, "Contactor Servomechanisms Employing Sampled-Data," Trans.
A.I.E.E., 73, 1954, pp. 51-64.
E. A. Russell, “Design Criterion for Stability of Sampled-Data On-Off Servo-
mechanisms," Ph. D. thesis, Columbia University, New York, 1953.
§ B. C. Kuo, "The z-transform-Describing Function for Nonlinear Sampled-Data
Control Systems," Proc. of the I. R. E., 48, No. 5, May 1940, pp. 941-942.

Sec. 12.5
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 475
(4) The actual output of the nonlinear element, rather than the
fundamental component of the Fourier series, is considered.
Stability of the System
The nonlinear sampled-data system under investigation is shown
in Fig. 12-30. The sampler is assumed to be ideal, meaning that the
sampler output e*(t) is an impulse train magnitude modulated by
the input e(t). The relay characteristic has a dead zone D and was
given previously by Eq. (12-1). The stability of the nonlinear sampled-
data system is defined as follows: If the system has a self-sustained
oscillation in response, the system is said to be unstable; other-
wise, it is stable. In other words the present analysis deals mainly
with the condition of sustained oscillations when the reference input
r(t) becomes zero after some time t.
..."
In the error signal e(t) is sinusoidal with period TenT, where
n = 2, 3, 4, .. and T is the sampling period in seconds, the sampler
output e*(t) must also be a periodic function, although it may not
have the same frequency as e(t). Since e*(t) can have values only
at the sampling instants, the period of e*(t) must also equal nT.
Thus when the characteristics of the zero-order hold are considered,
the relay, G(s), the functions h(t), m(t), and c(t) see Fig. 12-30
must also have the same period as e*(t). This is a very important
feature of this system.
Under the condition of self-sustained oscillation, r(t) = 0; hence
e(t) = r(t) − c(t) = −c(t)
(12-94)
which means that e(t) must also have the same period as c(t).
Description and Modification of the System Configuration
The z-transform of the output of the system shown in Fig. 12-
30 can be written as
where
C(z) = E(z) × NG(z)
NG(z) = 3[N(s)G(s)]
(12-95)
(12-96)
N(s) represents the transfer function or the describing function of
the combination of the hold device and the relay, excluding the
sampler. The closed-loop transfer function of the system is given by
=
C(z) NG(2)
R(z)
1 + NG (2)
(12-97)
However, the describing function technique for stability studies
cannot be effectively applied to Eq. (12-97), since the function

476 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
r(t)
e(t)
e*(t)
v*(t) ||
Zero - order
hold
m(t)
G(s)
c(t)
Relay
G₁(s)
Fig. 12-31 Modified system with the hold device and the relay
transposed.
NG(z) cannot be separated into two functions N and G(z). A
modified block diagram of the system is shown in Fig. 12-31, in
which the zero-order hold and the relay are transposed. From the
analytical point of view the system behavior is not altered at all by
this modification. The nonlinear element in this case is considered
to include only the relay whose output signal v*(t) is an impulse
train with constant amplitudes. The input to the controlled process
G(s) is not affected by the change.
is
Now, the closed-loop transfer function of the modified system
C(z) N(2) G₁(z)
R(z)
=
1 + N(z) G₁(z)
(12-98)
where N(2) is defined as the z-transform discrete describing function
of the relay. Now the study of the stability of the nonlinear sam-
pled-data system involves the investigation of the equation
or
1+ N(z) G₁(z) = 0
G₁(z) = -1/N(z)
(12-99)
(12-100)
The Discrete Describing Function N(z)
The derivation of the discrete describing function of a nonlinear
element is based on the assumption that the input signal to the
nonlinear element is a sinusoidally modulated impulse train. The dis-
crete describing function is defined as the ratio of the z-transform
of the output v*(t) to the z-transform of the assumed sinusoidally
modulated input e*(t). Thus
N(z) = V(z)/E(z)
Suppose that the input to the sampler is
e(t) = Ecos (at + $)
(12-101)
=
E(cos + cos at
equation is
sin at sin )
(12-102)
E(z)
-
Ex
2z cos aT + 1
[(z
-
cos aT) cos & − sin aT sin ]
-
The z-transform of the last
(12-103)

Sec. 12.5
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 477
Since the period of the self-sustained oscillation is an integral
multiple of the sampling period T, only these periods are considered
in the derivation of N(z).
With reference to the system shown in Fig. 12-31, the output
of the zero-order hold m(t) is either a constant or zero between
two successive sampling instants. For a given period T. of c(t),m(t)
may have many possible forms. Figure 12-32 illustrates the possible
forms of m(t) for T. = 4T. However, since the error signal e(t) is
assumed to be a sinusoid with period T. = 4T, only a few of the
forms of m(t) illustrated in Fig. 12-32 may actually occur in the
system. Figure 12-33 shows all the possible wave forms of m(t)
when varies from 0 to 360 degrees and Tc = 4T.
The periodic functions shown in Fig. 12-33a are actually of the
same form as those shown in Fig. 12-32b, except for the phase shift
of ±nπ/2, n = 0, 1, 2, . . .. Likewise, the periodic functions shown
27
3T
5T
6T
e(t) O
47
(a)
m(t)
27
3T
T
4T
5T
6T
(b) 4 = 1
m(t)
3T
T
4T
5T
6T
(c) 4 = 2
m(t)
+1
27
6T
0
t
-1
3T
4T
5T
(d)
m(t)
+1
27
3T
6T
о
-1
4T
5T
(e)
m(t)
2T
37
6T
4T 5T
(f)
Fig. 12-32 Possible configuration of m(t) for T = 4T. (a)
Sinusoidal error signal, Te = 4T. (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f),
output signal of zero-order hold device.

478 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
e(t)
=-45° = 45°
27
37
27
m(t) O
-1
O
T
4T
4T
37
m(1)
+
(i) −45°< < +45°
-45° =-135°
e(t)
37 4T
37
T
27
U
0
4T
27
(ii) −135°<ø<-45°
e(t)
=-135° =225°
T
4T
m(1) O
о
27 37 4T
27
3T
(iii) −225°<$ < − 135°
e(t)
=-225° 45°
T
27
T
m(1) O
- 1
0
37
4T
37
27
4T
(iv) 45° <<-225°
(0)
T = 4T, and ▲ = 1.
Fig. 12-33 (a) Possible configurations of m(t) and e(t) when
varies from 0 to 360 degrees.
in Fig. 12-33b and Fig. 12-32c are identical except for a phase shift.
Clearly the waveform given in Fig. 12-32d, e, and f cannot occur
in any form of self-sustained oscillations in this system. Thus, if the
system is to have a self-sustained oscillation characterized by T. =
4T, only the waveforms shown in Fig. 12-33a and b need be con-
sidered. It is important to notice that the functions shown in Fig.
12-33a have one positive and one negative relay correction during
each period T. and that these of Fig. 12-33b have two positive and
two negative relay corrections during each period. These have to
be considered separately even though they all have the same period.
Similarly, we can show that for all T. = nT, n = even integers, the
number of positive relay correction signals is equal to that of the
negative relay corrections during one period Te. This number of
corrections is designated by A. For T. = 2T, it is apparent that ▲ can

Sec. 12.5
479
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
e(t)
=-90°
Ø =0°
+1
m(t) O
27
4T
2T 3T
T
3T
- 1
(i) - 90° << 0°
e(t)
=-90° = -180°
1
T
37
37
m(t) O
t
O
27
4T
2T
- 1
(ii) - 180°<< −90°
+1
27
4T
m(t) O
T
37
-1
(iii) -270°<< -180°
=-180° =-270°
AT
2T 3T
e(t)
0°
Ø =-270°
27
4T
T
2T
m(1) O
37
3T 4T
(iv) -360°<<-270°
(b)
Te = 4T, A = 2.
Fig. 12-33 (b) Possible configurations of m(t) and e(t) when
varies from 0 to 360 degrees.
be only unity. In general, for T. = nT, n = even integers, the values
of A can be 1, 2, 3,
.
(n = 1).
For a given period of T. = nT, n = even integers, the loci of
-1/N(z) form regions in the decibel versus phase shift plot, each
for one possible value of A. These regions are later defined as the
"critical regions" for the specific T. and A. The symbols -1/N(z)|max
and -1/N(z) in are used to indicate the boundaries of the region.
We can show that all the periodic functions given in Fig. 12-33a
have the same critical region, thus indicating that the study of the
conditions of self-sustained oscillation is independent of the phase
shift of m(t) once T. and ▲ are given.
For TenT, n = odd integers, the number of positive and nega-
tive relay corrections may be different. This fact is illustrated in
Fig. 12-34b for T, = 3T. In this case, the designation of the type
of oscillation by ▲ = 1, 2, 3, . . . is inadequate. This type of oscilla-

480
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
m(t)
e(t)|
T
27
3T
m(t)
3T
T
27
m(1)
+1
(i)-60° < < 0°
-60°
8
Q
2T
37
e(t)|
O
=-60° = -120°
27
3T
(ii)-120° << - 60°
3T
O
T
2T
-1
· = -180°
= -120°
e(t)
O
2T
(iii)-180° < Ø < −120°
m(t)
T
О
2T
3T
O
(iv)-240° < < −180°
m(t)
T
27
3T
-1
m(t)
e(t)|
(v) -300° < <-240°
2T
-1
3T
37
-180°
240°
-240°-300°
2T
3T
e(t)
O
$ = 300° = −360°
T 2T
37
(vi) -360° < < −300°
T = 3T, A = 1.
Fig. 12-34 (a) Possible configurations of m(t) and e(t) when
varies from 0 to 360 degrees.
tion is designated by A, where i is the number of positive relay
corrections and j is the number of negative relay corrections during
each period Te. Figures 12-34a and b show that if the self-sustained
oscillation has a period of 3T, the oscillation may be any one of
the three types: A12, A21, or A (the same as ▲ = 1).
1
=
The typical procedure for the derivation of -1/N(≈), −1/N(2)|inax,
and -1/Nmin is given in the following for T. 4T. With the same
procedure, the expressions for -1/N(z), −1/N(2)|inax, and −1/N(≈)|inin,
for the relay with dead zone, are derived for T. = 2T, 3T, . . . 8T.
The corresponding critical regions are plotted in gain-phase plots in
Figs. 12-35 through 12-41. If necessary, the critical regions of −1/N(2)
can be derived for Te 9T, 10T, . . . etc.
=
Case (1) Te = 4T, A = 1

Sec. 12.5
481
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
m(t)
+1
e(t)
Ø = -30°
Ø = 30°
27
27
-1
3T
3T
(i) -30° << 30°
m(t)
+1
e(t)|
Ø = -30° Ø
-90°
O
27
-1
T
27
3T
3T
m(t)
(ii) - 90°<< -30°
37
T 2T
-1
m(t)
- 1
27
m(t)
e(t)
Ø = -90°
=-150°
27
37
(iii) - 150°< < −90°
(iv) - 210°< <-150°
e(t)|
O
(v) - 270° <<-210°
Ø = -210°
= -150°
Ø = -210°
37
0
27
$ =-270°
3Т
27
e(t)|
=-270° = −330°
T
O
27
3T
+1
T
о
-1
12T 3T
m(t)
+1
27
-1
37
(vi) - 330° <<-270°
Te 3T, A12, 421-
Fig. 12-34 (b) Possible configurations of m(t) and e(t) when
varies from 0 to 360 degrees.
If the output signal of the zero-order hold in Fig. 12-31 is of
the form shown in Fig. 12-33a and i, the Laplace transform of the
relay output v*(t) is written
1
V*(s)
= 1
e
-2TS + e
-ATS
-6T's
-
e +
=
1+e-21
(12-104)
The z-transform of v*(t) is
V(x)
=
x² + 1
Thus from Eq. (12-101)
1
-
= ―
N(2)
-
E(z) - Ex(z cos
V(z)
=
2² + 1
―
sin )
+1
2
E(z cos sin )
(12-105)
(12-106)

482
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Decibels
18
16
∞
- N₁Z) | Max
ma
T=12-
12
T=10-
8
8
7
N(z)
6
O
Decibels
-4
-8
16
·G₁(z) = 5
T=4-
N(z) min
G₁(z)
3-
-220-210 -200 -190 -180-170-160 -150 -140 -130
Phase shift
Fig. 12-35 Critical region for relay with dead zone, T, = 2T,
and G₁(z) plot, G(s) = 1/s(s + 1).
12
-izmin 412,421)
- Nilma (4=1).
N(2
max
2
-81
-220°
-200°
Asymptotic
to =-180°
∞
-180°
T= 8 sec
7
6
3
-Niz)|min (4=1)
~G₁(z) (Tc=3T)
Phase shift
-160°
-140°
Fig. 12-36 Critical regions for relay with dead zone, T, = 3T,
and G₁(z) plot, G(s) = 1/s(s + 1).

Sec. 12.5
483
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Decibels
16
12
Asymptotic
to = -180°
∞
N(z)|min(41)
-zmin(4=2)
-8
-220°
-200°
∞
(4-1)
N(2)
Asymptotic
to =-135°
T-6 sec
5
3
4
2
G₁(z) (T=4T)
1.5
-180°
-160°
-140°
Phase shift
Fig. 12-37 Critical regions for relay with dead zone, Tc = 4T,
and G₁(z) plot, G(s) = 1/s(s + 1).

∞
16
-Nizmin 423, 432)-
12
Nizil max(4=2)
8
Decibels
D
O
-4
-Nzmin(4=2)
-Nizmin 412 421)
1
N(z) min
Asymptotic
to = 180°
6
-N(2) max(412)
5
2
3
1.5
G₁(z) (Tc=57).
XT=1sec
-8
-220°
-200°
-180°
Phase shift
-160°
-140°
Fig. 12-38 Critical regions for relay with dead zone, T, = 5T,
and G,(z) plot, G(s) = 1/s(s + 1).

484 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
Decibels
Decibels
16
12
4
4
Asymptotic
to = -210°
N(z)|mi(4=3)
1
-Niz)|max (4=2)
-N(z)|min (4=1))
izmi4=2)
-8L
-220°
-200°
Asymptotic
Asymptotic
to = -180°
to = -150°
7
6
max
5
-180°
Phase shift
T=1sec
-160°
2
3.
G₁(z) (T₂ = 6T)
-140°
Fig. 12-39 Critical regions for relay with dead zone, T, = 6T,
and G₁(2) plot, G(s) = 1/s(s + 1).

16
Mizil mox (4=3)
(z) min(434)
T=6/
12
51
∞
4
O
-N(z) min (423)
3
412
-Nizil min (4=3)→→
N(z)
(4-1):
-Niz)|mo(4=2)-
max
(z)|mi(42)
G(z) (T=7T).
-4
-8
-220°
-200°
-180°
Phase shift
-160°
2
-140°
<-120°
Fig. 12-40 Critical regions for relay with dead zone, Te = 7T,
and G₁(2) plot, G(s) = 1/s(s + 1).

Sec. 12.5
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 485

Decibels
16
12
8
4
-4
Asymptotic
to = -202.5°
(4-4)
min
max
1
Nizilmin (4=1)
N(z)
1
-z)(4=3)
N(z) min
Asymptotic
to =-180°
Asymptotic
to = -157.5°
- Nizil max(4=1)
2
3
(4=2)
N(z) max
Nizm(4=2)
T=1 sec
N(2
min
-G₁(z) (T=8T)
-8
-220°
-200°
-180°
Phase shift
-160°
6
-140°
-120°
When Te
Fig. 12-41 Critical regions for relay with dead zone, T, = 8T,
and G₁(2) plot, G(s) = 1/s(s + 1).
=
= 4T and z = 1/90° j, Eq. (12-106) becomes
1 E(sin j cos )
N(z)
=
j
= E-180° + & (12-107)
With reference to Figs. 12-33a and i, the limitations on the magni-
tude of e(t) are:
or
Hence
Ecos > D and E sin
Emin D/cos and
=
&
<D for -45° << 45°
Emax = D/ | sin |
p
1
N(;
..
and
1
D
max
=
Emax | −180° +
=
Isin $1
-180° + (12-108)
D
=
Emin -180° &
=
N(2)
1
1
=
(z) min
N(z) min
Letting
Emax
=
then
1
Emax/D and Emin
max
= -
1
V(2) |E=E
N(z) FE
max
=
=
sin
min cos
The values of -1/N(z)|max and -1/N(x)'min when varies from
-45 deg. to +45 deg. are tabulated below:
=
cos
-180° (12-109)
Emin/D
(12-110)
1
/-180° + (12-111)
1
/-180° + $ (12-112)

486
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Φ
- 45°
-30°
-20°
-10°
0°
1
N(z) max
1
1.414-225°
2/-210° 2.92/-200° 5.78-190°
N(2) min
1.414-225° 1.155-210°
1.06/-200°
1.015 / — 190°
1/ — 180°
+10°
+20°
+30°
+45°
5.78/-170°
2.92-160°
2/-150°
1.414/-135°
1.015/-170°
1.06 / - 160° 1.155/-150°
1.414/-135°
-
The critical region for the condition of self-sustained oscillation
characterized by T. 4T and A = 1 is the region enclosed by the
loci of −1/N(z)|'max and −1/N(z)|'min and is shown in Fig. 12-37.
We can show that the oscillations shown in Fig. 12-33a all have
the same critical region.
Case (2) Te = 4T, A = 2
It is shown in Fig. 12-33b that when a system has a sustained
oscillation of period 4T, the output of the hold circuit can also have
the form of ▲ = 2. The Laplace transform of v*(t) which corre-
sponds to the waveform shown in Fig. 12-33b and i is
-
V*(s) = 1 +
Ts
-2T8
- e
2-3TS + e-4TS + ė
-57s
1+e
Hence
Thus
- T3
=
1+e-273
(12-113)
V(x)
22 + z
=
(12-114)
z² + 1
-
− N(2)
= -
o
2+1
E(z cos sin )
-
(12-115)
For zj, Eq. (12-115) becomes
- N(2)
= 0.707 E-135° +
(12-116)
The range of as indicated in Fig. 12-35b and i is between 0° and
-90°. Therefore, the limitations on E are:
D
EIDAX
= ∞
Emin
for -45° < < 0°
sin &
Emax
= ∞ Emin
-
cos
D
for 90° < < −45°
Thus
-
1
N(z
max
= ос
for
0° >>-90° (12-117)

Sec. 12.5
487
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
1
=
N(2) min sin
1
-135° + for -45° <<0°
&
1
(12-118)
1
=
N(z) min cos
-135° + for −90° << -45° (12-119)
The critical region of Te = 4T and A = 2 is plotted in Fig. 12-37.
Examination of the expression derived for -1/N(z) and the con-
ditions on e(t) that give each value of ▲ leads to the following
conclusions:
(1) The discrete describing function N(z) of the relay under
consideration is a function of the relay dead zone D, and of the
frequency a, the amplitude E, and the phase of the input sinusoid
e(t).
(2) The regions bounded by the loci of -1/N(z)|x_and
-1/N(2) nin in the gain-phase plot for TenT (n = 2, 3, 4, . . .)
are symmetrical about the -180 deg axis. The maximum widths.
for the critical regions are (2π/Tc)T for Te = 4T, 6T, 8T, . . ., nT,
n = even integers, and (27/T.)(T/2) for T. = nT, n = odd integers.
When n is very large, the critical regions are very narrow and final-
ly approach a straight line which lies on the 180 deg axis when
n is infinite.
-
(3) For certain values of E and ø, −1/N(z) is infinite, and the
critical regions extend to infinity (open region). The asymptote of
the -1/N(z) Inax boundaries is always the -180 deg. axis, whereas
the asymptotes of the -1/N(z)in boundaries are (27/T.)(T/
2 r. nr for n = even integer> 2, and ±(2π/Tc)(T/4)|r=nr for
n = odd integers greater than 1.
-
Stability Analysis and Limit Cycles From Gain-Phase
Plot and Describing Function
-
The condition of self-sustained oscillation in the system of Fig.
12-30 is defined as existing when the denominator of Eq. (12-98) is
equal to zero; that is,
1 + N(z) G₁(z) = 0
Equation (12-120) can also be written as
G₁(2) = -1/N(z)
(12-120)
(12-121)
Since the left-hand side of Eq. (12-121) is the z-transfer function of
the linear plant and the right-hand side consists of the negative in-
verse of the z-transform describing function of the nonlinear ele-
ment, the stability analysis of the nonlinear system with sampled-
data follows the well-known procedure of the describing function.

488 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
and gain-phase plane studies of a nonlinear system with continuous-
data. In terms of the gain-phase plot of G₁(z), the graphical stabili-
ty study of the sampled-data system consists of the following steps:
(1) Plot G₁(z) on gain-phase coordinates for Tc = 2T, 3T, 4T, . . .
using T as a parameter on the loci.
(2) Superpose on the gain-phase coordinates the family of critical
regions of 1/N(z) for T. = 2T, 3T, 4T,
The following conclusion can be reached from the inspection of
the relative position of the G₁(z) loci and the critical regions:
(1) If a portion of the G₁(z) locus for some Te falls within the
critical region of this T. for a certain relay dead zone D (when D
varies, the critical regions of −1/N(2) simply shift up or down along
the 180 degree axis), then a set of E, 6, A and Te, exists such
that
=
-
G₁(2)=-1/N(2)
Consequently, for any sampling period T the portion of the G₁(z)
locus that lies in the corresponding critical region will produce a
self-sustained oscillation characterized by ▲ at Te, p, and E, and the
system will be unstable.
(2) If the G₁(z) loci for more than one value of Te fall within
their respective critical regions, for the same value of D the system
can have more than one mode of oscillation.
(3) The T's along the portion of the G.(z) locus outside the
corresponding critical region provide a stable system.
A
One special condition exists when the relay dead zone D becomes
zero and the relay is considered to be ideal. From the physical view-
point the relay will provide a corrective output whenever there is
a signal at its input, no matter how small this signal may be. Under
this condition some types of oscillation disappear in the nonlinear
system, and some can only appear for several discrete values of p.
For instance, when D = 0, the sustained oscillation of the types, T. =
4T and ▲ 1 can occur only in the system when the phase angle
of e(t) is a multiple of ±7/2. This fact can be observed by referring
to Fig. 12-37 in which the critical regions for A = 1 and 2 are
shifted to
- along the -180° deg axis when D becomes zero.
Evidently, the critical region for A= 2 degenerates into a region.
which is bounded by two vertical straight lines with the left- and
the righthand boundaries located at -225 deg and -135 deg,
respectively. The critical region for A = 1 degenerates into a single
vertical line along the -180 deg axis. For T. = 6T and D = 0, self-
sustained oscillation of the type A = 1 can no longer exist. This is
due to the period of 6T of the sinusoidal e(t). This e(t) will produce
more than two-relay corrective signals in either direction during

Sec. 12.5
489
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
=
----
one period, whereas A = 1 specifies that only one positive and one
negative relay correction can be made during each period T..
Referring to Fig. 12-39, the critical region for A = 1 is a closed
region; when this closed region is shifted to ∞ along the -180
deg axis, it is no longer expected to enclose any portion of the
G₁(2) locus for T. 67. Similarly, the critical region for A = 3
becomes a vertical strip centered along the -180 deg axis with its
left and right-hand boundaries located at the -210 deg and -150
deg lines, respectively. The critical region for A 2 is narrowed
down to a vertical line along the -180 deg axis. For T. = 8T, the
sustained oscillations are characterized only by A3 and A = 4,
and those of ▲ = 1 and 2 are eliminated.
=
The following example gives a numerical illustration of the
application of the critical regions in the sinusoidal study of a non-
linear sampled-data control system.
Example 12-6
Consider that the open-loop transfer function of the relay type sampled-
data system of Fig. 12-30 is given by
1
G(s)
=
s(s+1)
(12-122)
The sampling period is one second, and the relay has a dead zone of 0.1.
With reference to the system configuration of Fig. 12-31, we have
1
G₁(s) =
X
s(s + 1)
-e
S
1 -T's
The z-transform of G₁(s) is given by
G₁(2)
=
-T
z(T − 1 + e−¹) + 1 − e−™ (T + 1)
(≈ − 1)(≈ — e-T)
(12-123)
(12-124)
=
..."
The loci of G,(z) with T as a variable parameter are plotted in Fig. 12-42
for T, 2T, 3T, 4T, . . . 8T. For the relay dead zone specified (D = 0.1),
the normalized critical regions of Fig. 12-35 through 12-41 are shifted down
by 20 db. Then superposition of these shifted critical regions on the G₁(z)
loci of Fig. 12-42 shows that the following modes of oscillations are possible
in this system when T = 1 sec.
TABLE 12-3
Mode of Osc. Te (sec.)
C
Amplitude of oscillation
describing function
1
2
3
4
4456
122♡
method
0.31
0.438
3
0.572
0.838
=
For example, when Te 4T, z = 190°; when Te
relationships between T, and z are established.
difference equation
method
0.30
0.352
0.525
0.80
=
5T, z
=
172°; etc. Thus the

490
Chap. 12
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
=27
16
To=4T
Tc =57
6T 7T
Tc = 37
T = 12sec
12
T=8
-10-
-9
87
Constant
T loci
8
7
O
Decibels
4
-4
-8
-IOL
-200°
-190°
-180°
-6
5
4
1.5
-170°
-160°
Phase shift
Constant frequency
loci G,(z)
-150°
-140° -130°
G₁(s)
=
-
1(1 − e-ST) 7
s²(s + 1)
Fig. 12-42 Frequency loci of G₁(z) in gain-phase plane.
These results are obtained by observing that when D = 0.1, the T = 1 sec.
points on the G₁(≈) loci fall inside their respective critical regions for only
the four modes of oscillations listed above. When D= 1, the critical regions
of Figs. 12-35 through 12-41 are not shifted; all the T 1 sec. points on
=
the G(z) loci fall outside their respective critical regions, and the system is
always stable (without sustained oscillation). The amplitude of oscillation of
c(t) can be computed directly from the G,(z) loci. For r(t) = 0, the amplitude
of c(t) is equal to the amplitude of the error e(t). Therefore,
E=\e(t)| = |c(t)|
Also, self-sustained oscillations occur when
G₁(2) 1/N()
(12-125)
(12-126)
For certain T. and T, when ≈ is a point on the unit circle in the z-plane,
say, 21, we can write
|G,(2)|=|-1/N(≈₁) |
(12-127)
The values of | -1/N(z) | suggest a simple method of predicting the amplitude
of oscillation of c(t) from the values of G₁(z,). We observe that | −1/N(z)| = kE,
where k is a constant for any Te. From Eqs. (12-125) and (12-127), we have

Sec. 12.5
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 491
E=
IG (1) 1
(12-128)
Equation (12-128) implies that whenever the G₁(z) locus for a certain Te is
given, the locus of the amplitude of oscillation of c(t) is related to the G₁(z)
locus by only a constant factor k. However, we should keep in mind that
Eq. (12-128) is valid for only the portion of G₁(z) which lies inside the
critical regions for the same Te. For example, for T, = 4T and ▲ = 1,
Therefore, Eq. (12-128) gives
-1/N(2) |= E
E = |G₁(2) |T.=4T
-
(12-129)
(12-130)
which means that when the system has a self-sustained oscillation which is
characterized by T. = 4T and ▲ = 1, every point on the G₁(z) locus inside
the critical region in the gain-phase plot represents the amplitude of c(t)
for the corresponding sampling period T. In the present example for T = 1
sec. the following value of E is obtained from the G₁(z) locus in Fig. 12-37:
E=G₁(2) |T-4 sec = 0.31 (-10 db)
T=
Te=4
Similarly, for T, = 4T and ▲ = 2, Table 12-3 gives
-1/N()| = 0.707E = |G₁(z) | T₁ =AT
= 0.438
(12-131)
(12-132)
Therefore, for T = 1 sec., E = 0.31/0.707
An interesting comparison can be made of the results that are obtained in
this example by use of the sinusoidal analysis with describing function to
those that are computed in the same system by the state transition method
in Sec. 12.2. In Sec. 12.2 the same relay sampled-data system is analyzed by
means of the difference equation approach. Figures 12-4 and 12-5 show the
four different modes of oscillations of the system when the system is subjected
to various initial conditions. The amplitudes of oscillation of c(t) are tabulated
in the last column of Table 12-3. Whereas the difference equation approach
gives the solution for only a particular set of initial conditions, the deter-
mination of the possible modes of oscillations under various initial conditions
is extremely difficult. However, the describing function method introduced in
this section does point out that for the system under study with T = 1 sec.
and D = 0.1, only the four modes of oscillations listed in Table 12-3 are
possible under any initial conditions.
=
The results in Table 12-3 show that the amplitudes of self-sustained
oscillation which are predicted by the two different methods are quite close,
except for mode 2 when Te 4 sec and ▲ = 2. Note that both the difference
equation and the discrete describing function methods deal with the system
response at the sampling instants only. Furthermore, the describing function
method assumes that the input to the sampler is sinusoidal and that only the
fundamental component of the relay output is considered to be significant.
In reality, the oscillations in a nonlinear system are seldom sinusoidal.
Therefore, the accuracy of the sinusoidal analysis depends entirely on how
much the output c(t) differs from a sine wave. In fact, the amplitudes of

492 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
oscillation listed in Table 12-3 which are determined by the discrete describing
function are extremely close to the results obtained by Chowt using the
conventional describing function method.
Nonlinear Systems with More than One Synchonized Sampler
One distinct advantage of the discrete describing function method
is that it can be applied to a nonlinear system with more than one
synchronized sampler. Figure 12-43 shows the block diagram of a
nonlinear sampled-data system with two samplers synchronized to
open and close at the same time. The closed-loop transfer function
of this multi-sampler system is
r(t)
N
Sampler
T
Relay
H(s)
Zero-order
hold
G(s)
c(t)
G₁(s)
Sampler T
Fig. 12-43 Nonlinear sampled-data system with two synchronized
samplers.
C(z)
R(z)
-
N(2) G₁(2)
1 + G₁(z) H(z) N(z)
(12-133)
The stability study of the system now involves the investigation of
the following condition:
G₁(2)H(z) = −1/N(z)
(12-134)
For the relay-type nonlinearity with dead zone, all the critical regions
shown in Figs. 12-35 to 12-41 are still valid for this system.
Nonlinear Systems Without Zero-Order Hold-Finite Pulse Width
Considerations
The nonlinear system studied in the preceding sections is con-
sidered to have a zero-order hold following the sampler. If the zero-
order hold is absent and if the sampling duration of the sampler
can be assumed to be infinitesimal, the describing function technique
presented here can still be applied. Instead of plotting G₁(z), which
includes the transfer function of the hold, only the locus of G(z)
in the gain-phase plot need be plotted using the same critical regions.
However, in some cases, without a hold device a finite pulse
+ C. K. Chow, op. cit.

Sec. 12.5
NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS 493
width has to be considered. In this case, an approximation can be
made if the narrow pulses with width p are approximated by flat-
topped pulses. The sampler can then be represented by an ideal
sampler followed by a fictitious hold device which holds the sampled
signal for p second only and then drops to zero instantaneously until
the next impulse comes along. The transfer function of G₁(s) is
written
G₁(s)
――
The z-transform of G,(s) is
Conclusion
1
-
e˜ps
G(s)
S
G₁(2) = (1 − x ¯¹¹) 3[G(S)] (p«T)
-
(12-135)
(12-136)
A discrete describing function utilizing the z-transformation has
been introduced for a relay-type nonlinearity for sampled-data systems.
The critical regions which are defined by the describing function
are used to study the condition of self-sustained oscillations by
investigating the relative position of the G₁(z) loci and the critical
regions. The effect of varying the sampling time T on the system
stability is shown clearly on the G₁(z) loci. As has been shown,
the method can be applied to multisampler system as well as to
systems without hold devices. We might note that the discrete
describing function method can also be applied to other types of
amplitude dependent nonlinearities such as saturation with dead zone.
REFERENCES
Altar, W. and Helstrom, C. W., "Phase Plane Representation of Sampling
Servomechanisms," Research Report R-94410-14-B, Westinghouse Research
Lab., Pittsburg, Penna., September 1953.
Andronow, A. A. and Chaikin, C. E., Theory of Oscillations, (trans. Lefschetz),
(Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 1949).
Aseltine, J. A., "Nonlinear Sampled-Data System Analysis by Incremental
Phase Plane Method," Proc. of the International Federation of Automatic
Control, Moscow, 1960.
Aseltine, J. A. and Nesbit, R. A., "The Incremental Phase Plane for Nonlinear
Sampled-Data Systems," I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-5,
August 1960, pp. 159-60.
Chow, C. K., "Contactor Servomechanisms Employing Sampled-Data, Trans.
A. I. E. E., Part 2, 1954, pp. 51-64.

494 NONLINEAR SAMPLED-DATA CONTROL SYSTEMS
Chap. 12
Ellis, P. H., "Extension of Phase Plane Analysis to Quantized Systems,"
1. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-4, November 1959, pp. 43-54.
Franklin, J. N., and Mullin, F. J., "Bounded, Asymptotically-Negative Feed-
back in a Sampled-data System With One Integrator," Proc. of International
Federation on Automatic Control, Moscow 1960, pp. 457-458.
Izawa, K., "Discontintinuous Feedback Control Systems With Sampling Action,"
Proc. of International Federation on Automatic Control, Moscow, 1960, pp.
7-11.
Izawa, K., "On-off Control With Periodic Sensing Device," Trans. A. S. M. E.,
80, 1958.
Izawa, K., and Weaver, L. E., "Relay-type Feedback Control Systems With
Dead Time and Sampling," Trans. A. I. E. E., 42, 1959, pp. 49-54.
Kalman, R. E., "Nonlinear Aspects of Sampled-data Control System," Proc.
of the Symposium on Nonlinear Circuit Analysis, 4, Polytechnique Institute
of Brooklyn, New York, 1956.
Kodama, S., "Stability of Nonlinear Sampled-data Control Systems," I. R. E.
Trans. on Automatic Control, January 1962, pp. 15–23.
Kuo, B. C., “Design of Relay-type Sampled-Data Control Systems by Use of
Discrete Describing Functions," I. R. E. Convention Records, Part 4, 1962.
Kuo, B. C., "Nonlinear Feedback Control Systems With Sampled-data," Ph.
D. dissertation, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, 1958.
Kuo, B. C., "The z-transform Describing Function for Nonlinear Sampled-
Data Control Systems," Proc. of I. R. E., 43, No. 5, May 1960, pp. 941-942.
Meserve, W. E. and Torng, H. C., "Investigation of Periodic Modes of
Sampled-Data Control Systems Containing a Saturating Element," A.S.M.E.
Paper No. 60-JAC-9.
Mullin, F. J. and Jury, E. I., "Phase Plane Approach to Relay Sampled Data
Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., Part 2, January 1959, pp. 517-24.
Nease, R. F., “Analysis and Design of Nonlinear Sampled-Data Control
Systems," W.A.D.C. Technical Note 57-162, Servomechanisms Lab., M.I.T.
June 1957.
Nelson, W. L., "Pulse Width Control of Sampled-Data Systems," Technical
Report T-35/B, Columbia University, July 1959.
Russel, F. A., "Design Criterion For Stability of Sampled-Data On-off Servo-
mechanisms," Ph. D. thesis, Columbia University, 1953.
Stout, T. M., "A Step-by-Step Method for Transient Analysis of Feedback
Systems with One Nonlinear Element," Trans. A. I. E. E. 76, Part 2, January
1957, pp. 378-90.
Tou, J. T., "Analysis of Sampled-data Control Systems Containing Nonlinear
Element," Proc. I. R. E., 46, No. 5, May 1958.
Tou, J. T. and Vadhanaphuti, “Optimum Control of Nonlinear Discrete Data
Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., Part 2, September 1961, pp. 166–71.

Additional References
Bennett, W. R., "Spectra of Quantized Signals," Bell System Technical Journal,
27, July 1948, pp. 446-72.
Bertram, J. E., "The Effect of Quantization in Sampled-Feedback Systems,"
Trans. A. I.E. E., 77, Part 2, September 1958, pp. 177–82.
Boothroyd, A. R., "Application of Sequence Transform Analysis to the Design
of Sampling Control Systems," Royal Aircraft Establishment, Technical
Note G. W. 405, March 1956.
Boxer, R., "A Note on Numerical Transform Calculus," Proc. of the I. R. E.,
45, pp. 1401-6, October, 1957.
Boxer, R. and Thaler, S., "A Simplified Method of Solving Linear and Non-
linear Systems," Proc. of the I.R. E., 44, January 1956, pp. 89-101.
Brown, R. G., and Murphy, G. J., “An Approximate Transfer Function for the
Analysis and Design of Pulsed Servos," Trans. of the A.I. E. E., 41, Part 2
1952, pp. 435-40.
Bruns, T. J., Cloud, J. D., and Salzer, J. M., "Experiments With a Digital
Computer in a Simple Control System," Proc. of the Western Computer
Conference, 1954, pp. 60-74.
Chestnut, H., Dabul, A., and Leiby, D. W., "Analog Computer Study of
Sampled-Data Systems," Proc. Computers in Control System Conf., October
1957.
Elgard, O.I., "An Analog Computer Study of the Transient Behavior and
Stability Characteristics of Serial Type Digital Data Systems," Trans. A. I.
E. E., 77, Part 1, No. 37, July 1958, pp. 358–66.
Farmanfarma, G., "Analysis of Linear Sampled-data Systems with Finite
495

496
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES
Pulse Width; (Open-loop)," Trans. A.I.E. E., 75, Part 1, January 1956, pp.
808-19.
Farmanfarma, G., "Analysis of Multiple Sampler Systems With Finite Pulse
Width (Open-loop)," Trans. A.I.E. E., 77, Part 2, 1958, pp. 20-28.
Farmanfarma, G., "General Analysis and Stability Study of Finite Pulsed
Feedback Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 77, Part 2, July 1958, pp. 148-62.
Franklin, G., "Filtering Deterministic Messages From Sampled-Data," Tech-
nical Note TN-3/127, Columbia University Electronics Research Lab., New
York, June 1956.
Freeman, H., "Multipole Sampled-Data Control Systems," Technical Report
T-12/13, Columbia University Electronics Research Lab., New York, Sep-
tember 1955.
Freeman, H., and Lowenschuss, O., "Bibliography of Sampled-Data Control
Systems and z-transform Application," I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control,
March 1958, pp. 28-30.
Higgins, T. J. and Greer, R. W., "Classified Bibliography on Feedback Control
Systems," Part 1, Sampled-Data System, A. I. E. E. paper 58-1269.
Ketchledge, R. W., "Logic for a Digital Servo System," Bell System Technical
Journal, 38, January 1959, pp. 1-18.
Kukel, J., "Sampling in Linear and Nonlinear Feedback Systems," I.R.E.
Convention Record, Part 4, 1957, pp. 43-56.
Lawden, D. F., "A General Theory of Sampling Servo Systems," Proc. of
the I. E. E. (London), 98, Part 4, October 1951, pp. 31-36.
Murphy, G. J. and Ormsby, R. D., "A Survey of Techniques for the Analysis
of Sampled-Data Control Systems," I. R. E. Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol.
AC-2, February 1957, pp. 79-90.
Ragazzini, J. R., "Digital Computers in Feedback Systems," I. R. E. Convention
Record, Part 4, 1957, pp. 33–42.
Ragazzini, J. R. and Bergen, A. R., "A Mathematical Technique for the
Analysis of Linear Systems," Proc. of the I. R. E., 42, November 1954, pp.
1645-51.
Raymond, F. H., "Analysis of Discontinuous Servomechanisms," Annales de
Telecommunications, Paris, 4, 1949, pp. 250-256, 307-314, 347-357.
Sklansky, J., and Ragazzini, J. R., "Analysis of Errors in Sampled-Data Feed-
back Systems," Trans. A. I. E. E., 74, Part 2, 1955, pp. 65-71.
Spero, P. E., "The Effects of Digitalization of the Performance of a Feedback
Control System," Proc. Assoc. Computing Machinery, September 1955.
Stromer, P. R., "A Selective Bibliography on Sampled-Data Systems," I.R.E.
Trans. on Automatic Control, December 1958, pp. 112-14.
Teichmann, T., "Closed-Loop Control Systems Containing a Digital Computer,"
I. R. E., Trans. on Electronic Computers, September 1955, pp. 106-17.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES 497
Thaler, S. and Boxer, R., "An Operational Calculus for Numerical Analysis,"
I. R. E. Convention Record, Part 2, 1956, pp. 100-105.
Thomson, W. E., "On Two-Sided z-transforms," I. R. E. Trans. on Circuit
Theory, Vol. CT-3, June 1956.
Tostanoski, B. M., "The Analysis of Sampled-Data Servomechanisms, Per-
formed on the IBM Type 650," Trans. A. I. E. E., 75, Part 1, 1956, pp. 446
-50.
Tou, J.T., “Analysis of Sampled-Data Control Systems With Finite Sampling
Duration," Proc. National Electronics Conf., 13, 1957, pp. 561-73.
Widrow, B., "Adaptive Sampled-Data Systems-A Statistical Theory of Adap-
tation," I. R. E., Wescon Convention Record, Part 4, 1959.
Widrow, B., "Adaptive Sampled-Data Systems," Proc. of International Federa-
tion on Automatic Control, Moscow, 1960, pp. 406-11.
Widrow, B., "A Study of Rough Amplitude Quantization by Means of Nyquist
Sampling Theory," Trans, I.R. E., Vol. CT-3, No. 4, December 1956, pp.
266-76.

PROBLEMS
Problems for Chapter 2
x(t)
K
M
F
Figure 2P-1
2-1 A particle of mass M is connected as shown in Fig. 2P-1 and is at rest
in its equilibrium position at t = 0. The force is in the form of blows
of impulses of strength F which are given to the particle at t = nT sec
(n = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .). Write the equation of motion for the system and
solve for the displacement x(t) of the particle by the Laplace transform
method. K linear spring constant = M(u² + w}); u = constant and
2π/T; f viscous friction coefficient = 2Mu.
Ws
=
=
=
2-2 The following signals are sampled by an ideal sampler with sampling
period T. Determine the sampler output e*(t), and evaluate the pulsed
transform E*(s) by the Laplace transform method and the complex.
convolution method.
(a) e(t) = te¯at
=
(b) e(t) = eat sin wt (a constant)
2-3 Prove the "Sampling Theorem."
2-4 Prove that if a signal e(t) contains no frequency components higher
than we rad/sec, it is completely characterized by the values e(k) (nT),
e(k-1) (nT), . . ., e'(nT), and e(nT), (n = 0, 1, 2, . . .) of the signal
498

PROBLEMS 499
measured at instants of time separated by T = 1(k + 1)(2π/w.) second,
where
e(k)(nT) = [dke(t)]t_nr
2-5 (a) Find e*(t) of e(t) = e¯alel, (-∞∞ <t<∞). Find the two-sided
Laplace transform of e*(t), E*(s). Determine the region of conver-
gence of E*(s).
(b) Find e*(t) of e(t) = eat eat, (t0), and find E*(s). Compare
the two E*(s) functions obtained in (a) and (b). Discuss your
findings.
2-6 A "delayed" sampler is considered to close for a short duration pat
instants t = A, A + T, ▲ + 2T, ▲ + 3T, . . . ▲ + nT, . . ., where
T>A> 0 and T is the sampling period in seconds. The input to the
sampler e(t) is continuous. The output of the sampler, denoted by e*(t)a,
is assumed to be a "flat-topped" pulse train, since A«T. Derive the
pulsed transform of e(t)a, E*(s, A) (Note that this can also be referred
to as the "delayed pulse-transform" of e*(t)). For small p, assume that
1- e-p³ps. Determine the "delayed pulse-transform" of e(t) = e¯al.
ex(t)
So
p=pulse width
e (t)
LA P=NA
T
T+p
(a)
ex(t)
First pulse from the sampler
豆
​SA
eza(t)
e(t)
ep(t)
2nd pulse
S24
eks(t)
SKA
-e(t)
e(N-1)4(1)
SIN-11A
(b)
Figure 2P-7
2-7 The "delayed pulse-transform" described in Problem 2-6 can be applied
to finite-pulsewidth considerations in sampled-data systems. As shown
in Fig. 2P-7a, a pulse of width p can be considered as the resultant of
N elementary pulses of width A, such that NA = p, and ▲ is very
small. Therefore, a practical sampler can be represented by N samplers
So, SA, S2A,.. S(N-1)A, connected in parallel as shown in Fig. 2P-7b,
implying that sampler S, samples at instants 0, T, 2T, . . nT, . . .;
sampler SA is actuated at instants A, A + T, ▲ + 2T, . A+ nT;
etc. Derive the pulsed transform of e*(t).
....
Problems for Chapter 3
...9
·
3-1 Two different schemes of triangular hold are shown in Figs. 3P-1a and
3P-1b, respectively. Write the impulse responses and the transfer func-
tions of the triangular holds. Which of these is physically realizable?

500
PROBLEMS
e(t)
e(t)
t
от 27 37475767
от 27 37 47 57 67
(a)
(b)
Figure 3P-1
e(t)
OT 2T 3T 4T 5T 6T 7T
Figure 3P-2
3-2 Show that the polygonal approximation of a continuous signal shown
in Fig. 3P-2 can be made by use of the two triangular holds of Prob.
3-1. Derive the impulse response and the transfer function of the poly-
gonal hold.
Problems for Chapter 4
4-1 Derive expressions for the z-transform of 1/s" and 1/(s+a)". From
these z-transform expressions derive the z-transform of 1/s³, 1/s³, and
1/(s + a)³.
4-2 Obtain the z-transform of the following functions:
1
(a) 5(5² + 1)
4-3 Obtain the inverse z-transform of
1
(b) 5²(s+1)
0.52
G(z)
=
-
(≈ − 1)(≈ − 0.5)
4-4 Evaluate the inverse z-transform of
z(x²+2x+1)
G(z)
=
(x²
-
≈ + 1) (≈² + z + 2)
by means of the following methods:
(a) the real inversion formula
(b) the partial fraction expansion
(c) power series expansion.
4-5 Obtain the initial-value and the final-value of the inverse of the follow-
ing functions:
2
(a) G(z) =
(1
≈¯¹)(1 − 0.2≈¯¹)

PROBLEMS
501
1
(b) G(2)
=
(1
-
(1 0.52-1)
4-6 Find the modified z-transform of the following functions:
(a) 1/s2
1
(b)
52(s + a)
1
(c)
s(s + a) (s + b)
Do the modified z-transforms of these functions check with their z-trans-
forms when_m = 1?
e(t)
(t)
G(s)
Figure 4P-7
(1)
c(t)
4-7 For the open-loop sampled-data system shown in Fig. 4P-7,
2
G(s) =
and T
= 1 sec
s(s+2)
For a unit step input, determine the output response at t = 0, 1/3, 2/3,
1, 4/3, 5/3, 2, seconds. Use the submultiple sampling method.
....
4-8 For the open-loop sampled-data system shown in Fig. 4P-7, given that
s² +3.18s + 13
G(s)
=
T = 1 sec r(t) = unit step
(s + 1)(s² + 0.04s + 10)
(a) Obtain the z-transform of the output. Evaluate c(nT).
(b) Obtain the output between sampling instants.
(c) Determine the initial-value and the final-value of the output response
c(t).
4-9 For the open-loop sampled-data system shown in Fig. 4P-7, given
G(s) =
100
s(s² + 100)
T= 0.1 sec r(t) = unit step
(a) Use the z-transform method to evaluate the output response.
(b) Use the submultiple sampling method to evaluate the output response
at t = 0, T/3, 2T/3, T, 4T/3, . . ..
Problems for Chapter 5
5-1 For the following sampled-data systems construct the original signal
flow graph, the sampled signal flow graph, and the composite signal
flow graph. Evaluate C(s) and C*(s) from the flow graphs.

502 PROBLEMS
R(s)
G₂(s)
G₁(s)
(a)
D*(s)
+
R(s)
C(s)
G₁(s)
G₂(s)
+
TX
D*(s)
(b)
R(s)
C(s)
G(s)
T
H₁(s)
D*(s)
T
H₂(s)
(c)
C(s)
Figure 5P-1
5-2 Draw the state transition flow graphs for the following difference equa-
tions. Include all initial conditions on the flow graphs. Solve these
equations using the flow graphs and the z-transform.
(a) y[(n + 2)T] + 5y[(n + 1)T] + 3y(nT) = nT y(0) = 1, y(T) = 0
(b) y[(n + 2)T] + 3y[(n + 1)T] + 2y(nT) = e¯¹º y(0) = 0, y(T) = 0
5-3 Draw the state transition flow graph for the simultaneous difference
equations
-
y₁[(n + 2)T] + 3y,[(n + 1)T] + y₁(nT) — 2y2(nT) = r₁(nT)
Y₂[(n + 2)T] + y½[(n + 1)T] — 4y₁(nT) + y½(nT) = r²(nT)
Find Y,(z) and Y₂(z). The initial conditions are
y₁(0) = 1,
y₂(0) = 2,
y₁(T) = 0
Y₂(T) = 0

PROBLEMS 503
R(s)
G₁(s)
G₂(s)
C(s)
H₂(s)
(d)
H(s)
T
.X
T
R(s)
G,(s)
G₂(s)
G3(s)
C(s)
H(s)
(e)
H(s)
G₂(s)
(f)
+
.X
T
R(s)
G₁(s)
T
G₂(s)
C(s)
GG(s)
G5(s)
R(s)
G₂(s)
G₂(s)
G4(s)
C(s)
r(1)
D(s)
G₂(s)
(g)
Figure 5P-1 (continued)
z.o.h.
G(s)
c(1)
Figure 5P-4

504 PROBLEMS
5-4 For the closed-loop sampled-data control system shown in Fig. 5P-4,
G(s)
=
1
s(s+1)(s+2)
The input signal is a unit step function.
T 1 sec
(a) Draw the state transition flow graph for the system.
(b) Obtain the state transition equations in the Laplace domain for
X₁(s), X₂(s), and X,(s), where X₁(s) = C(s).
(c) Obtain the state transition equations for x,(t), x₂(t), and x,(t).
r(t)
e(t)
ep(1)
(p)
h(t)
z.o.h
S+1
Finite duration
sampler
ep(t)
Ah(t)
e(t)
c(t)=x,(t)
Π
kT kT +p
KT KT+p Op
T T+P
Ор
T T+P
Figure 5P-5
5-5 A sampled-data feedback control system is shown in Fig. 5P-5. The
sampler is considered to have a finite sampling duration p (second),
and the sampling period is T second; (T> p). The zero-order hold
holds the output of the sampler at the constant level of e(kT + p)
during the time interval kT + p < t < (k + 1)T. The output relations
of the sampler and the hold are illustrated in the following.
(a) Write the transition equation (or equations) of the system during
the time interval kT <t < kT + p.
(b) Write the transition equation (or equations) of the system during
the time interval kT + p < t < (k + 1)T as a function of the
initial conditions and the input signal.
Assume that the input signal is a unit step function.
r(t)
1
Кк
Variable-gain
amplifier
s(s+1)
T
c(t) = x₁(1)
Figure 5P-6
5-6 In the feedback control system shown in Fig. 5P-6, K represents the
gain of a time-varying amplifier; K changes value with respect to
time. However, K can change value only at t kT, where k = 0, 1,
=
2, . . ., and T = 0.1 second. Determine K for k = 0, 1, 2,
so that
the system reaches a deadbeat response after 0.2 second. The input is
a unit-step function.

PROBLEMS 505
Problems for Chapter 6
6-1 For the error-sampled control system with unity-feedback shown in
Fig. 6P-1,
r(t)
-
z. o. h.
G(s)
c(t)
1
Figure 6P-1
G(s) = 5²(+5) T = 1 sec r(t) = unit step function
(a) Obtain the z-transform of the output.
(b) Obtain the output response at the sampling instants.
(c) Determine the final-value of the output response.
6-2 The characteristic equations of certain sampled-data control systems are
J given as follows. Determine the stability of these systems.
(a) z³ + 5x² + 3x + 2 = 0
(b) 3≈5 + 4z¹ + ≈³ + 2x² + 5≈ + 1
(c) z¹ +9≈³ + 3≈² + 9≈ + 1 = 0
-
(d) ≈3 1.522 2x + 3
-
=
0
(e) 24
= 0
1.36823 +0.412622 +0.08% + 0.0025 = 0
r(t)
G(s)
·C(1)
(a)
흐
​-T
10 +T
(c)
Figure 6P-3
Hold
G(s)
-c(t)
(b)
6-3 The sampled-data system shown in Fig. 6P-3b is used to approximate
the continuous system in Fig. 6P-3a. The transfer function of the con-
tinuous system is
1
G(s)
=
1 + 2s
The input signal is a unit step function.

506 PROBLEMS
(a) Evaluate the output of the sampled-data model at the sampling
instants when the hold device is a zero-order hold. The sampling
period is 0.25 second.
(b) Evaluate the output of the sampled-data model at the sampling
instants when the hold device is a triangular hold with impulse
response shown in Fig. 6-3c. The sampling period is 0.25 second.
(c) Compare the responses in parts (a) and (b) with the response of
the continuous system.
(d) Repeat parts (a), (b), and (c), when the sampling period is 1
second.
6 4 It is convenient to use a sampled-data model to approximate a continuous-
data system, especially when the system contains a transportation lag.
A continuous-data system with transportation lag is shown in Fig. 6P-
4a. Two possible sampled-data models which may be used to approxi-
mate the continuous system are shown in Fig. 6P-4b and 6P-4c.
-r(1)
r (1)
s(s+1)
(0)
r(t)
z. o. h.
e-s
s(s+1)
-c(t)
(b)
e-s
z.o.h
c(t)
s(s+1)
(c)
Figure 6P-4
(a) Determine the output responses of the sampled models at the
sampling instants. The input is a unit step function, and T = 0.5
second.
(b) Discuss what factors must be considered in the selection of the
sampling period in the two sampled models.
65 Given the following closed-loop transfer functions for sampled-data
systems, determine the percent overshoot and peak time of the step
response.
(≈ + 0.5)
(a)(2)=3(x+0.5)
R)

PROBLEMS 507
(b)
C(z)
=
0.52
(22-2+0.5)
R(x) (22
C(z)
(c) R(z)
=
0.388(z+0.002) (z+0.717)
(x²
-
≈ + 0.632) (≈ − 0.05)
6-6 For the sampled-data control system shown in Fig. 6P-1,
G(s)
=
K
s(1+0.2s)
(a) Sketch the root loci for the system without the zero-order hold for
T= 0.1 second and T = 1 second. Determine the marginal value
of K for stability in each case.
(b) Repeat part (a) when the system has a zero-order hold.
6-7 The following polynomial in z represents the characteristic equation of
a certain sampled-data control system. Sketch the root loci of the system.
Determine the marginal value of K for stability.
23 + K2² + 1.5Kz (K + 1) = 0
6-8 The open-loop transfer function of the error-sampled control system
shown in Fig. 6P-1 is given by
0.012K(z + 2.3) (≈ + 0.15) (z — 0.22)
GhoG(z) = (z − 1)(≈ − 0.05)[(≈ − 0.532)² + (0.29)²]
-
(a) Sketch the root loci in the z-plane as a function of K.
(b) Find the value of K which will give a relative dampling ratio of
50 percent to the dominant control poles. What is the velocity error
constant?
6-9 Sketch the root loci in the z-plane for the sampled-data system shown
in Fig. 6P-9.
r(t)
r(t)
z. o. h.
T=0.1 sec
Ke-0.5s
s(s+1)(s+3)
-c(t)
Figure 6P-9
G₁(5)
c(1)
G₂(s)
Figure 6P-10

508 PROBLEMS
6-10 For the sampled-data system shown in Fig. 6P-10,
3.14
G₂(s) = 0.81s + 13.16
s2
G₁(s) =
1
s+ 1
The sampling period is 1 second.
(a) Determine the output at the sampling instants for the unit step input.
(b) Determine the output in between the sampling instants (use any
method) for a unit step function input. Is the closed-loop system
stable?
Problems for Chapter 7
7-1 Sketch the Nyquist plot for the following sampled-data control systems.
The systems are assumed to be error-sampled with a zero-order hold
and unity feedback. The sampling period is 1 second. Determine the
stability of the closed-loop system.
5
(a) G(s)
=
s(1 + 0.2s)
(b) G(s) :
=
1
(s + 1)²
Hold
device
2
s(1+0.2s)
c(t)
T=1sec
Figure 7P-2
7-2 The block diagram of a sampled-data system is shown in Fig. 7P-2.
Sketch the Nyquist plots of the open-loop transfer function when
(a) the hold device is a zero-order hold.
(b) the hold device is a first-order hold.
Comment on the results.
7-3 For the system in Fig. 7P-2, Problem 7-2, plot the closed-loop frequency
response for the two cases. Determine the values of M,.
7-4 The open-loop transfer function for an error-sampled control system
with zero-order hold and unity-feedback is
G(s) =
=
1
s(s + 1)(s+2)
The sampling period is one second. Determine the phase margin, gain
margin, and M, for the closed-loop system.
Problems for Chapter 8
8-1 Consider the sampled-data system of Fig. 8P-1. The transfer function
of the controlled process is given by
G₁(s)
=
3
s(1+0.2s)

PROBLEMS 509
r(t).
z.o.h.
Gc(s)
G₁(s)
c(t)
Figure 8P-1
The sampling period is 1 second. Design a continuous-data compensator
so that the resonant peak M, of the system is less than 1.5. The veloc-
ity error constant of the system should be maintained at the same level.
8-2 The system shown in Fig. 8P-1 has a transfer function
G₁(s)
=
2.5
s(s + 1)(s+2)
and a sampling period of 1 second.
(a) What is the transient peak overshoot of the uncompensated system?
(b) Design the continuous-data compensator Ge(s) so that the phase
margin of system is 40 degrees or more. What is the peak over-
shoot of the compensated system?
8-3 A digital compensator has the transfer function
G.(z) =
-
-
(1 − 0.1½¯¹)(1 − 0.5z¯¹)
(1 − 0.65z¯¹)(1 − 0.82-¹)
-
-
Determine the transfer function H(s) of the equivalent continuous-data
feedback structure shown in Fig. 8–16(b).
8-4 A sampled-data system with feedback compensation is shown in Fig.
8P-4. Given
r(t)
H(s)
z.o.h.
G₁(s)
-c(t)
Figure 8P-4
1
G₁(s) =
s(s+1)
H(s)
=
0.123s2 0.448s2.42
(s + 2.35)(s + 1)
The sampling period is 1 second. Determine the pulse transfer function.
D(z) of the equivalent system with cascade digital compensation (Fig.
8-15).

510 PROBLEMS
Problems for Chapter 9
9-1 Synthesize series pulsed-data networks to realize the following pulse
transfer functions:
(1 − 0.12¯¹)(1 − 0.52¯¹)
(a) D(z) =
(1 − 0.652¯¹)(1 − 0.8z¯¹)
(b) D(z) =
(1 + 2x¯¹)(1 − ≈¯¹)
(10.22-1)
9-2 Determine which of the following pulse transfer functions can be real-
ized by series pulsed-data network, by feedback pulsed-data network,
by both of these two schemes, by neither of these two schemes.
-
(1 − 0.5%¯¹)
(a) D(z)
=
1
(b) D(2)
=
(1 - 2x-¹)
0.32-1
---
0.18%-2
(1 − 0.12-¹)
(c) D(z) = 1-32-1+2x-2
1
-
(d) D(z)
=
32-1+2x-2
1+ 3x1 + 22-2
(e) D(z) = 1-2¹+22
9-3 Synthesize a pulse-data R-C network to realize the following pulse
transfer function:
D(z) =
z-1(1 – 0.4z-1)(1 – 0.9z-1)(1 – z^1 + 0.5z^2)
-
(1 − ≈¯¹)(1 − 0.8≈¯¹)(1 − 0.12¯¹)(1 − 2≈¯¹)(1 − 32-¹)
-
-
--
---
9-4 Realize the pulse transfer functions in Problem 9-1 by pulsed-data proc-
essing units such as that shown in Fig. 9-10.
9-5 Represent the pulse transfer functions in Problem 9-1 by a set of first-
order difference equations. Draw signal flow graphs to portray these
difference equations (see Fig. 5-33a).
r(1)
D(s)
2.0.h.
G₁(s)
c(1)
T
T = 1 sec
·D(z)·
Figure 9P-6
9-6 For the sampled-data control system shown in Fig. 9P-6, design the
digital controller D(z) so that the system satisfies the following require-
ments:
K, 30 sec1
phase margin
50 degrees
The transfer function of the controlled process is

PROBLEMS 511
G₁(s) =
K
s(s + 2)(s + 10)
The sampling period is 1 second.
9-7 An error-sampled control system has the block diagram as shown in
Fig. 9P-6. The transfer function of the controlled process is
G₁(s)
=
K(s + 1)
s(s² + s + 2) (s + 3)
The sampling period is 0.5 second.
(a) Sketch the root loci in the z-plane as a function of K.
(b) What is the marginal value of K for stability?
(c) When K is set at the marginal value for stability, design a digital
compensator so that the damping ratio of the closed-loop control
poles is equal to 0.707.
9-8 An error-sampled control system with unity-feedback has the open-loop
z-transfer function
GhoG₁(z)
=
K(z+1)
(≈ − 1)²(≈ 0.5)
(a) Sketch the root loci in the z-plane as a function of K.
(b) Design a cascade digital compensator to stabilize the system.
9-9 For the sampled-data control system shown in Fig. 9P-6, the transfer
function of the controlled process is
and T = 1 second.
K
G₁(s) =
s(s+1)
(a) Design a digital compensator D(z) so that the following specifica-
tions are satisfied:
Damping ratio of control poles = 0.707
Peak time t, 3 sec
Overshoot 8 percent
K₂
=
1 sec-1
(b) Realize the digital controller by a pulsed-data R-C network.
(c) Determine the unit step response of the compensated system.
(d) Determine the unit ramp response of the compensated system.
(e) Add a dipole near z = +1 to the closed-loop transfer function of
the compensated system so that the velocity error constant K, is
increased to 10 sec ¹. The added transient term in the step response
resulting from the addition of the dipole is to have an initial am-
plitide less than 1 per cent of the unit step input. Evaluate the step
response and the ramp response of the compensated system (with
increased K.).
(f) Discuss what effect may the added dipole have on the bandwidth
of the closed-loop sampled-data system.

512
PROBLEMS
9-10 Consider the sampled-data control system of Problem 9-6.
(a) Design a digital compensator so that the system output sequence in
response to a step-function input has the shortest settling time
(deadbeat response).
(b) Design a digital compensator so that the continuous output of the
system in response to a step-function input has the shortest settling
time without ripples.
9-11 For the sampled-data control system shown in Fig. 9P-6.
G₁(s)
=
1
s(1 + 0.1s)(1 + 0.02s)
The sampling period is 0.5 second.
(a) Synthesize a digital compensator so that the continuous output
follows the step input signal with zero error after a shortest pos-
sible transient time.
(b) Plot the system output as a function of time.
9-12 For the system described in Problem 9-11.
(a) Synthesize a digital compensator so that the continuous output
follows a ramp input signal with zero error after a shortest possible
transient time.
(b) Plot the step response and the ramp response of the compensated
system.
Problems for Chapter 10
ultivate & skip sang by)
10-1 Determine the z-transform of the output of the multirate sampled-data
system shown in Fig. 10P-1. The input signal is a unit step function.
Plot the output response of the system.
e(1) X
1
c(t)
Xc* (113
s(s+1)
T₁ = 2 sec
T2=3 sec
Figure 10P-1
r(t)
c(t)
z.o.h.
D₁(s)
z.o.h.
G₁(s)
TIN
Figure 10P-2
10-2 With reference to Fig. 10P-2, the transfer functions of the system are
G₁(s)
=
K
s(s+1)
D₁(s)
=
The sampling period is 1 second.
1
s + 0.5

PROBLEMS 513
(a) Investigate the stability of the system as a function of K and N.
Plot the maximum value of K for stability versus N.
(b) Sketch the root loci for the system as functions of K when N = 1,
2, 3, and 4.
10-3 (a) Draw the state transition flow graph for the system in Problem 10-1.
(b) Write the transition equations of the system.
10-4 (a) Draw the state transition flow graph for the system in Problem
10-2 for N = 1 and N = 2.
(b) Write the transition equations from the transition flow graphs.
C(1)
12.0.h
G(s)
Sc
Figure 10P-5
10-5 For the sampled-data system shown in Fig. 10P-5,
G(s)
=
1
s(s + 1)(s + 2)
The sampler closes at instants t = kT, kT + T₁, (k + 1)T, (k + 1)T +
T₁, ..., where k is a positive integer (k = 0, 1, 2, . . .); T
and Ti
-
0.8 second.
(a) Draw the state transition flow graph for the system.
(b) Write the state transition equations for the system.
= 1 second
r (1)
1
C(1)
s +0.5
z.o.h.
0.5 sec
z.o. h.
5+1
1 sec
Figure 10P-6
10-6 The block diagram of a multirate sampled-data control system is shown
in Fig. 10P-6. It is assumed that the samplers are synchronized.
(a) Draw the state transition flow graph for the system.
(b) Write the state transition equations for the system.
(c) Evaluate and plot the system response to a unit step function input.
10-7 The transfer function of the controlled process is
G₁(s)
=
1
s(s + 0.5) (s + 1)
(a) Design a multirate digital controller so that the system will respond

514
PROBLEMS
r(t)
c(t)
D(s)
➡z.o.h.
G₁(s)
1 sec
0.5 sec
Figure 10P-7
to a unit ramp function input with the shortest settling time and
zero steady-state error. There should be no ripples in between
sampling instants.
(b) Plot the ramp function response of the designed system.
Problems for Chapter 11
(stulis the anger
and
11-1 The auto-power spectral density of a stationary random process r(t) is
given by
Φττ(s)
=
4
0.04 $2
-
Find the sampled power spectral density function (2).
11-2 The input signal r(t) to the open-loop sampled-data system shown in
Fig. 11P-2 is assumed to be a member of a stationary random process.
The auto-power spectral density of r(t) is
Φττ(s)
=
4
―
(a) Find the following power spectral density functions
Pec(s) Pec(2) Pre(s)
(b) Find the autocorrelation function of the input, $,,(7).
r(t)
1
G(s) =
s(s + 1)
·C(t)
T=1 sec
Figure 11P-2
11-3 For the open-loop sampled-data system configuration shown in Fig.
11P-2, show that
Pec (z) = G(2¯¹) Þr•c(2)
11-4 Give proofs to Eqs. (11-85), (11-86), and (11-87).
11-5 Figure 11P-5 shows a sampled-data system whose mean-square error
is to be evaluated. Assume that the system M is a zero-order hold and
that Ma(s) = e-sT/2. The power spectral density of the input signal is
Φττ(s)
200
•Tr(s) = w3 - s²
(a) Evaluate the mean-square error e(t) as a function of w。 and T.
(b) Plot e²(t) as a function of w¿T.

PROBLEMS 515
r(t)
1-e
C(t)
e(t)
e-ST/2
Ca(t)
Figure 11P-5
[s(t)+(t)
D(s)
Gno(s)
G₁(s)
c(t)
·D(z)·
s(t)
Mg(s)
Ca(t)
e(t)
Figure 11P-6
11-6 Consider the sampled-data control system shown in Fig. 11P-6. Given
that
1
G₁(s) = 5(5 + 1)(s + 2
s(s+1)(s+2)
2
Φτιτο (5)
=
=
-
1 $2
Pr, 1 (white noise)
PT.(S) = PT,T(S) = 0
The sampling period is 0.1 second.
(a) Design a digital compensator to minimize the mean-square-sampled
error e²(nT). The desired system transfer function is M₁(s) = e¯sT¸
(b) Find the minimum value of e²(nT).
11-7 For the sampled-data system shown in Fig. 11P-6.
G₁(s)
=
1
s(s + 1)
Þr,r.(S) = 1 = 53 Prara(s) = 0.1
1
Φτητα
Φτπο(5)
=
PT.(S) = 0
The sampling period is 0.2 second.
(a) Design a digital compensator to minimize the mean-square error
e²(t). The desired system transfer function is M₁(s) = 1.
(b) Find the minimum value of e²(t).
Problems for Chapter 12
38
L
12-1 For the nonlinear sampled-data system shown in Fig. 12P-1, find the
following:

516 PROBLEMS
r(t)
X
1
z.o.h.
N
s(s+1)
c(t)
+1-
- 0.4
Nonlinear
element
0.4
X
Figure 12P-1
(a) the output response c(t)
(b) peak overshoot
(c) steady-state error.
The sampling period is one second; r(t) = 0.8u(t). Assume zero initial
conditions. Use the state transition method and the phase plane method.
12-2 (a) Repeat Problem 12-1 if the step input magnitude is increased to
0.9
(b) Repeat Problem 12-1 if the relay dead zone is increased to 0.6.
12-3 A sampled-data system with relay nonlinearity is shown in Fig. 12P-3.
Construct the phase plane trajectory in ċ versus c plane when the initial
conditions are c(0) = 2, ċ(0) = 0; r(t) = 0. Sketch the output of the
system.
r(t)
z.o.h.
T=1sec
Figure 12P-3
r(t)=0
2
z.o.h.
s+2
-2
T=1sec
c(t)
Figure 12P-4
12-4 A nonlinear sampled-data system with a lead compensation is shown
in Fig. 12P-4. Construct the phase plane trajectory in ċ versus c plane
when the initial conditions are c(0) = 2, c(0) = 0; r(t) = = 0. Sketch
the output c(t).

PROBLEMS 517
1.0-
0.5-
-0.75 -0.2
-X
0.2 0.75
-0.5
-1.0
Figure 12P-5
12-5 The nonlinear element contained in the sampled-data system of Fig.
12P-1 is considered to be a quantizer whose input-output characteristic
is shown in Fig. 12P-5.
(a) Evaluate the output response c(t) when r(t) = 0.5u(t).
(b) Determine the steady-state error, if there is any.
(c) Use the state transition approach and check the results by the phase
plane method.
r(1)
-0.2
z.o.h
2s
0.2
s(s+1)
c(t)
Figure 12P-6
12-6 For the nonlinear sampled-data system shown in Fig. 12P-6, sketch the
phase-plane diagram in ċ versus c. The input signal is a unit step
function. Assume ċ(0) = 0, c(0) = 0.
Slope = +1
r(t)
-0.2
D(z)
z.o.h.
G(s)
0.1
T = 1sec Digital
controller
Slope = +0.5
Figure 12P-7
12-7 (a) Design a digital compensator for the nonlinear sampled-data system
shown in Fig. 12P-7. The system is to have an output which will
reach its final value in the shortest possible time without overshoot
and steady-state error. The input signal is a unit step function. The
transfer function of the controlled process is

518
PROBLEMS
2
G(s) =
s(s+ 0.5)
(b) Repeat the design problem for
G(s)
=
1
s(s + 1)(s + 2)
12-8 Can the phase plane method of analyzing nonlinear sampled-data systems
be applied to systems with ramp inputs? Outline a general procedure
and give an example if possible.
r(t) = Q
1-1 +1
c()
Figure 12P-9
12-9 A sampled-data system with saturation is shown in Fig. 12P-9. Sketch
the trajectories in the incremental phase plane in Ac versus c for the
following initial conditions:
(a) c(0) = 3 Ac(0) = 0
(b) c(0) = 0_Ac(0) = 3
12-10 Sketch the phase plane trajectory in the incremental phase plane of
Ac versus c for the system in Problem 12P-4.
12-11 For the nonlinear system shown in Fig. 12P-1, is it possible for the
system to break into self-sustained oscillation (r = 0)? If so, what are
the amplitudes and frequencies of the possible modes of oscillations?
Find the smallest size of the relay dead zone so that self-sustained
oscillations will not occur.



e-amr
ae-bmr
(a - b)(x-e-bT)
a(z - e-ar)
a (z-e-ar)
e-amT
-a
APPENDIX
Laplace transform
E(s)
Time function
e(t)
TABLE OF TRANSFORMS z-TRANSFORMS AND MODIFIED 2-TRANSFORMS
z-transform
E(x)
1
2-n
Modified z-transform
E(z, m)
0
2-n-1+m
1
e-nt's
S
8(t)
d(t - nT)
u(t)
t2
e-at
Z
2-1
Tz
(x − 1)2
T²z (z+1)
(x-1)3
lim (-1)-1
a-0
an-i
2
дап-1
Z
2
e-ar
1
t
52
äm
2!
33
(n - 1)!
tn-!
sn
1
s+a
1
1
(s + a) (s + b)
b-
a
1
1
1
mT
+
-
T
(x − 1)2
m2
T2
2m + 1
2
+
1
lim (-1)-1,
a-o
(x − 1)2 (x-1)3
an-1
Jan-1 z
e-amT
2-e-ar
+
e-amt
s(s + a)
1
s2 (s + a)
(s + b)
s² (s + a)
1
s(s+a) (s + b)
1
(s + a) 2
a-
(e-at-e-bt)
— (u(t) - e-at)
a
1 (1-1)
(1)+0+ 금​(0-1)e-at
(u(t)
abbe-at-be-bi)
te-al
1
a(z e
b-a (2-0-3-2-0-17)
1
a (z
Tz
b(x-1)2
bTz
a (x-1)²
2
+
(1 - e-ar)z
1)(x - e-ar)
-bT
(1 - e-ar)z
a(z− 1)(z-e-ar)
(a - b)(1-e-ar)z
a(z− 1)(z - e-ar)]
bz
ab [ z = 1 + ( a − b ) ( z − e−ar)
—
-
az
(a - b)(z-e-ar).
Tze-ar
(x-e-a7)
bT
- 1)2
- x)
قامة
e-amt
e-bmT
е-ат
2
e-br
2
e-amT
—
e-ar
b
T
+
1) 2
amT-1
a(x-1)
+
+
(bmT +1
be-amr
ab z = 1 + (a - b) (x - e-ar)
Te-amTle-ar+m(z - e-ar)]
(z-e-ar)

1
s³ (s + a)
24 (t² - 21 + 2u(t) - e-ar)
a
a
+
S
s² + a²²
a
S
sin at
CoS at
sin hat
cos hat
Taz
+
(aT- 2) Tz
2a(x-1)
z
+
a² (x — 1)
2 e-ar)]
1) a²(z - e-aT)
z sin aT
z2-2z cos aT + 1
z2
z(x — cos aT)
2z cos aT+1
z sin haT
22-2z cos haT +
z(z
cos haT)
z2 2z cos haT + 1
-
+ ། (77
1)3
+
1)
(x
+1 - 1/4
-
(amT)2/2 — amT + 1
a² (z − 1)
z sin am T + sin (1 — m)aT
22 - 2x cos aT + 1
z cos amT
-
cos (1
-
m)aT
22-2z cos aT + 1
z sin hamT + sin h(1 − m)aT
-
22- 2x cos haT +1
z cos hamT
―
cos h(1
J
a
s(s² + a²)
1/2 (u(t) –
--
cos at)
2
z(z - cos aT)
22
a2
s²(s² + a²)
1
s(s + a) 2
1
s² (s + a)²
-
— 12[u(t) − (1 + at)e−at]
-
2 – Zu(e)
+
(
+
1-
sin at
Tz
(x − 1)²
1
2z cos aT+1
z sin aT
a z² — 2z cos aT + 1
z
2
---
e-ar
aTe-aTz
(z — e-ar)?
e-at
(aT + 2)z -222
(x − 1)²
-
a
mT
+
2 1
21 (2271) 2
aT
-
-
e-amr
a² (z — e-ar)
z² - 2z cos haT + 1
z cos amT
T
(x − 1)²
cos (1
m)aT
n)aT]
22 - 2x cos aT + 1
z sin amT + sin (1 — m)aT
-
a(z² - 2z cos aT + 1)
-
+ amT
e-ar
+
aTe-ar
(z - e-ar)?)
e-amT
amT - 2
2-1
2z
+
2
e-ar
1
(s + a)² + b²
s+ a
(s + a)² + b²
1
e-at sin bt
중​(
e-at cos bt
22
-
ze-ar cos bT
22
2ze-ar cos bT + e-2aT
1
a² + b²ll
--
- e-at sec & cos (bt + 4)] | a² + b² z ²
2
+ −
s[(s + a)² + b²]
= tan-¹(4)
22
ze-ar seco cos (bT –
22-2ze-ar cos bT + e−2αT
+
aTe-aTz
( z − e−ar)?
ze-ar sin bT
-
1)
2ze-ar cos bT+e-2a1
-
+
-
aTe-ar
e-ar)?
amT
z-
)e-amr]
1 e-amT[z sin bmT + e-ªT sin (1 — m)bT]
22 - 2ze-ar cos bT + e-2aT
T
e-amr
¿T [z cos bmT + e-ar sin (1 − m)bT]
z2-2ze-ar cos bT + e-2aT
1
a² + b² z = 1
e-amT sec {z cos (bmT + 4)
z2
2ze-ar cos bᎢ + e -2aT
e-ar
cos [(1 − m)bT –
T = $]}]


INDEX
Aaron, M. R., 12
Abscissas of convergence, 24
Adaptive systems, 16
Amplitude dependent nonlinearity,
493
Amplitude quantizer, 15
Analog computer simulation flow
graph, 133
Artificial signal source, 114
Autocorrelation function, 399
Barker, R. H., 86
Bilinear transformations, 159, 223
r-transform, 160
relation between 8-w-z-r trans-
forms, 229
w-transform, 160
Block diagrams for sampled-data sys-
tems, 104
cyclic-rate system, 371
open-loop multirate system, 359
Bode plot (diagram), 152, 216, 229
с
Calculus of variation, 420
Cancellation compensation, 308
Cascade compensation by bilinear
transformation method, 253
Characteristic equation, 151, 153
Chopper galvanometer, 8
Chow, C. K., 474
Compensation of sampled-data sys-
tems, 245
cancellation, 308
cascade, 246, 249
continuous networks, 245
feedback compensation, 247, 265
multirate sampling, 248
phase-lag, 251, 252, 301
phase-lead, 251, 252, 296
root-contour method, 304
Complementary strip, 36
Complex convolution, 24, 32, 92
Conditional feedback, 247
Constant damping loci, 61, 190
Constant damping ratio loci, 61, 190,
191
Constant frequency loci, 61
Continuous random signals, statistical
characteristics of, 393
Contour integration, 25, 93
Correlation functions, 395
autocorrelation, 395, 399
cross-correlation, 396
important properties of, 396
Critical points, 473
523

524 INDEX
Critical regions, 479
Cyclic-variable rate sampler, 371
Data reconstruction, 39-53
by polynomial extrapolation, 41
Dead zone of relay, 433
Deadbeat response design, 325
Decomposition of multirate samplers,
355
Delayed z-transform, 86
A-plane trajectory, 461
Difference equations, 16, 135, 458
differences of, 459
Difference operator, 459
Difference sequence, 459
Digital coded signals, 9
Digital compensation design, bilinear
transformation, 289
Digital compensator, 265
Digital computers in control systems,
7
Digital control systems, 1
Digital controller realization, 247,
271, 274
by digital computers, 283
by feedback RC networks, 278
by series-feedback RC networks, 279
by series RC networks, 276
Digital data-processing unit, 2
Digital transducer, 2, 9
Direct digital programming, 135
Discrete describing function, 476
E
Ensemble approach to statistical
properties, 394
Ensemble average, 398
Ergodic process, 394
Error constants:
with acceleration function input,
210
with ramp function input, 209
with step displacement input, 208
Error-sampling, 106
Error sequence, 206
modified, 414
Exponential hold device, 51-53
Extrapolation, 42
Feedback compensation with contin-
uous-data networks, 265
Fictitious hold device, 493
Fictitious sampler, 84
Fictitious transportation lag, 86
Filter, ideal, 40
Final-value theorem, 71, 101
Finite pulse width considerations, 492
First difference, 459
First-order hold, 46-49
gain and phase characteristics, 49
impulse response of, 47
transfer function of, 47
Flat-topped pulses, 493
Focus point, 444
Fogel, L. J., 28
Fourier coefficients, 21
Fourier series, 21, 472
Fourier transform, 21
Fractional-order hold, 49-51
gain and phase characteristics, 51
impulse response of, 50
Frequency domain criteria, 13
Frequency response, 215-244
closed-loop, 232-234
from modified z-transform, 235
Frequency spectrum of sampled sig-
nal, 20-38
Fundamental frequency, 472
Gain margin, 228
Gain-phase plot, 216, 232, 487
Gouy, G., 3
Guanella, G., 5
H
Harmonics, 22, 472
Harmonic generator, 22
Hidden oscillation, 150
Hold device:
exponential, 51
first-order, 46
fractional-order, 49
RC network as, 52
RLC network as, 53
zero-order, 42

INDEX 525
Ideal filter, amplitude characteristics,
40
Incremental phase-plane method, 458
Initial-value theorem, 70, 101
Intentional sampling, 8
Inversion formula:
of modified z-transform, 98
of z-transform, 64
Isoclines of phase-plane trajectories,
442
James, H. M., N. B. Nichols, R. S.
Phillips, 10
Joint probability density function,
395
Jury, E. I., 86
Laplace transform, 24, 31, 54
Light control system, 5
Limit cycles, 487
Lindorff, D. P., 172
Line spectrum, 22
inverse of, 95
inversion formula method, 98
power series method, 96
real translation theorem of, 99
transient response, 198
Modulator, pulse-amplitude, 20
Multirate sampling, 352
closed-loop systems, 364
open-loop systems, 353
N
Nichols chart, 234
Noise component, 419
Nonlinear sampled-data systems, 430
describing function analysis, 471
discrete describing function, 476
incremental phase plane analysis,
458
phase plane analysis, 437
state variable method, 432
Nonsynchronous sampling, 387
Nyquist criterion, 152, 216
Nyquist path, 218
Nyquist plot, 216
bilinear transformation method,
223
two-term approximation method,
220
z-transform method, 222
M
MacColl, L. A., 10
Magnification curve:
modified z-transform, 237-240
z-transform, 233
Magnification M, definition:
modified z-transform, 236
z-transform, 233
Mason's gain formula, 112
Maximum overshoot, 170, 174
Mean-square error,
410
Mean-square sampled error, 412, 420
Minimal response design, 325
disadvantages of, 332
Modified z-transfer function, 88, 90
Modified z-transform, 86, 235
complex translation theorem of, 100
definition of, 86
based on complex convolution, 92
final-value theorem of, 101
initial-value theorem of, 101
Oldenburg, R. C., and O. Sartorius,
8, 10
On-off furnace control, 431
On-off type servo, 431
Open-loop stable system, 227
Optimum control system, 410
Optimum synthesis using mean-square
error criterion, 417
Optimum transfer function, 420
Original signal flow graph, 113
Overshoot, 143
curves of percent, 175
Peak time, 170, 174
curves of, 176
Periodic strips, 36, 166

526 INDEX
Phase margin, 228
Phase-plane trajectories, 442
isoclines of, 442
of linear systems with continuous-
data, 440
of relay-type system with sampled
data, 445
of second-order systems, 442
of systems with sinusoidal inputs,
455
Physical realizability, 267
of systems with deadbeat response,
327
Pole-zero configuration:
effect on transient response, 164-
178
Power spectral density function, 396
Primary strip, 36, 158, 166
Probability density functions, 393
Probability distribution functions,
394
Pulse-amplitude modulator, 2
Pulse-amplitude sampling, 4
Pulse-data network, 272
Pulse modulator, 18
Pulse transfer function, 73
Quantizer, amplitude, 15
Quasi-sinusoidal oscillation, 432
R
Radar tracking system, 6
Random variables, 393
averages of, 395
continuous, 393
moments of, 395
sampled, 397
Realization of digital controllers by
digital computers:
cascade programming, 285
direct programming, 284
parallel programming, 286
pulsed-data processing units, 288
Realization restrictions for pulsed-
data RC networks:
feedback networks, 278
series-feedback networks, 279
series networks, 276
Relay-type servo, 431
Relay with dead zone, 433
Resonant frequency, 234
Response between sampling instants
of closed-loop systems, 82, 194
modified z-transform method, 86,
198
submultiple sampling method, 83,
195
Rise time, 143
Root contour method, 304
Root locus in the s-plane, 179
Root locus method, 178-189
rules of construction, 180
Routh-Hurwitz criterion, modified,
152, 157
Routh tabulation, 155
r-plane, 160
r-transformation, 160, 223
Russell, E. A., 474
s-plane:
mapping into the z-plane, 59
periodic strip in, 36
properties of sampled signal, 35
Saddle point, 444
Sampled power spectral density func-
tion, 403
Sampled random sequence, 398
Sampled random signals:
in sampled-data systems, 404
statistical characteristics of, 397
Sample points, 393
Sampler, 18
fictitious, 90
ideal, 29
mathematical description of, 20
Sample space, 393
Sampling duration, 20
Sampling frequency, 21
Sampling period, 20
Sampling process,
ideal, 29
18-38
mathematical analysis of, 20, 29
multirate, 352-370
uniform rate, 19
variable rate, 370
Sampling theorem, 27
Saturation characteristics, 469

INDEX 527
Saturation in sampled-data system,
468
Schur-Cohn determinant, 154
Schur-Cohn stability criterion, 153
Second difference, 459
Self-sustained oscillations, 475
conditions of, 475
Sensitivity, 8, 333
Signal flow graphs of sampled-data
systems, 112-124
composite, 115
Submultiple sampling method, 83
Synthesis:
by digital controllers, 272
by state variable approach, 347
Truxal's method, 324
using mean-square error criterion,
417
in the z-plane, 309
modified, 123
sampled, 114
state-transition, 133
Singular points of phase-plane trajec-
tories, 444
Sinusoidal inputs, 455
Sinusoidally modulated impulse train,
476
Skip sampling, 352
Stability boundary curves, 376
Stability criteria, 149-163
Jury's test, 156
modified Routh-Hurwitz, 157
Schur-Cohn, 153
Stability of sampled-data systems,
149-163
definition, 150
nonlinear systems, 475
Staleness weighting factor, 340
State transition equation, 131-142
of continuous-data systems, 131
of discrete-data systems, 131
of linear sampled-data systems, 136
of multirate sampled systems, 382
of nonlinear sampled-data systems,
446
vector-matrix notation of, 131
State transition flow graph, 133
State transition matrix, 133
State variables, 131-142
discrete, 136
of discrete-data systems, 134
Stationary random process, 394
Steady-state error, 143, 206
analysis, 206
coefficients, 207
constants, 207
from closed-loop pole-zero config-
urations, 212
between sampling instants, 211
T
Temperature regulation system, 3
Time approach to statistical proper-
ties, 394
Time average, 398
Time domain criteria, 13
Time sharing system, 6
Time varying system, 16
Tou, J. T., 420
Transfer function, 108
Transient response:
comparison of continuous-data and
sampled-data systems, 145
from root locus plots, 189
Transmission matrix, 125
of a feedback control system, 129
of parallel and series combination
of components, 128
Truxal, J. G., 12
Truxal's synthesis method, 324
U
Unit-pulse train carrier, 21
Variable-gain amplifier, 348
Variable-rate sampling, 370
Vector-matrix notation, 131, 433
Viscous friction coefficient, 444
Vortex, 444
W
Weighting sequence, 74
delayed, 89
Wiener, N., 14
Wiener-Kolmogoroff theory, 420
w-plane, 160
w-transformation, 160, 223

528 INDEX
Z
Zero-order hold, 42-46
circuit diagram of, 43
gain and phase characteristic of, 44
impulse response of, 43
z-plane, mapping from the s-plane,
59
z-transfer function:
modified, of open-loop sampled-data
systems, 88
of cascaded elements with no sam-
pling switches between them,
78
of cascaded elements with sampling
switches between them, 77
z-transform, 54
addition and subtraction of, 68
complex translation theorem, 70
definition, 54
delayed, 86
evaluation of, 56
final-value theorem, 71
initial-value theorem, 70
limitations of, 79
multiplication by a constant
theorem, 69
partial differential theorem, 72
real translation theorem, 69
z-transformation:
inverse, inversion formula, 64
partial fraction method, 63
power series method, 63

T
H
G
(GR)
-H
-(GH)
C(s):
=
R(s)G(s) [1+ HG*(s)] RG (s)H(s)G(s)
1+ HG*(s)
(GH)
C*(s)
=
RG*(s)
1+HG (s)
-H
-H
(GR)
C(z, m)
=
X2
HG(z, m)RG(z)
1+HG(z)
+ RG(z, m)
-GH
H
-H
G₁
G₂
C
H
G₁
၆၇
H
X2
-H
-H
X2
-H
C(s)
=
8
C*(s)
=
G*(s)R*(s)
1+G*(s) H*(s)
G*(s)R*(s)
1+G*(s) H*(s)
C(z, m)
=
G(z)R(z)
1+G(z)R(z)
-(HG,G₂)
C(s)
=
RG1(s)G2(s)
1+HG1G2*(s)
(RG)
C*(s)
=
-(HG2)
RG1*(s)G2*(s)
1+HG1G2**(s)
-H
C(z, m)
-6, (624)
=
RG1(z)G(z, m)
1+HG1G2(z)
C(s):
C*(s)
=
=
G1 (s)G2(s)R*(s)
1+ G1 (S) HG2*(s)
G1*(s)G2*(s)R*(s)
1+ G1 (S) HG2*(s)
X2
C(z, m)
=
-H
G1(z)G2(z, m)R(z)
1+G1(z) HG2(z)

T
グア
​[(t) = f(mt)


1

!
$

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
3 9015 00098 4925
1904


RESTR
DO NOT REMOVE
OR
MUTILATE CARD



